---
title: Metal Laboratory Casework
section: '123553.13'
divNumb: 12
divName: Furnishings
subgroup: Facility Construction
tags: ['Facility', 'Construction', 'Furnishings', 'Metal', 'Laboratory', 'Casework']
---


## General

   1. SUMMARY
   1. Work Included:
      1. The furnishing and installing of all casework indicated in the schedule and as shown on the drawings. All work in this section shall be governed by the conditions and provisions of the drawings and Specifications in so far as applicable.
   1. Related Sections:
      1. Division 11 Sections - Laboratory Fume Hoods and Biological Safety Cabinets
   1. Mechanical Specifications
   1. Plumbing Specifications
   1. Electrical Specifications
   1. CASEWORK DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
   1. Flush construction:
      1. Surfaces of doors, drawers and panel faces shall align with cabinet fronts without overlap of case ends, top or bottom rails. Horizontal and vertical case shell members (panels, top rails and bottoms) shall meet in the same plane without overlap, cracks or crevices.
   1. Slimline styling:
      1. Front width of end panels 3/4" and front height of top and bottom members 1".
   1. Self-supporting units:
      1. Completely welded shell assembly without applied panels at ends, backs or bottoms, so that cases can be used interchangeably or as a single, stand-alone unit.
   1. Interior of case units:
      1. Easily cleanable, flush interior. Base cabinets, 30" and wider, with double swinging doors shall provide full access to complete interior without center vertical post.
   1. Drawers:
      1. Sized on a modular basis for interchange to meet varying storage needs, and designed to be easily removable in field without the use of special tools.
   1. Case openings:
      1. Rabbeted-like joints all four sides of case opening for hinged doors and two sides for sliding doors in order to provide dust resistant case.
   1. Framed glazed doors:
      1. Identical in construction, hardware and installation to solid panel doors. Design frame glazed doors to be removable for glass replacement.
   1. CASEWORK PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
   1. Structural performance requirements:
      1. Casework components shall withstand the following minimum loads without damage to the component or to the casework operation:
      1. Steel base unit load capacity:
         1. 500 lbs. per lineal foot.
   1. Suspended units:
      1. 300 lbs.
   1. Drawers in a cabinet:
      1. 150 lbs.
   1. Utility tables (4 legged):
      1. 300 lbs.
   1. Hanging wall cases:
      1. 300 lbs.
   1. Load capacity for shelves of base units, wall cases and tall cases:
      1. 40 lbs. per square foot.
   1. Metal Finish Performance Requirements:
      1. Abrasion resistance:
         1. Maximum weight loss of 5.5 mg. per 100 cycle when tested on a Taber Abrasion Tester #E40101 with 1000 gm wheel pressure and Calibrase #CS10 wheel.
   1. Hardness:
      1. Surface hardness equivalent to 4H or 5H pencil.
   1. Humidity resistance:
      1. Withstand 1000 hour exposure in saturated humidity at 100 degrees F.
   1. Moisture resistance:
      1. No visible effect to surface finish after boiling water trickled over test panel inclined at 45 degrees for five minutes.
   1. No visible effect to surface finish following 100 hour continuous application of a water soaked cellulose sponge, maintained in a wet condition throughout the test period.
   1. Adhesion:
      1. Score finish surface of test panel with razor blade into 100 squares, 1/16" x 1/16", cutting completely through the finish but with minimum penetration of the substrate, and brush away particles with soft brush. Minimum 95 squares shall maintain their finish.
   1. Salt spray:
      1. Withstand minimum 200 hour salt spray test.
   1. Chemical Resistance Finish Performance Requirements:
      1. Metal finish:
      1. Preparation:
         1. Spray clean metal with a heated cleaner/phosphate solution, pre-treat with iron phosphate spray, water rinse, and neutral final seal. Immediately dry in heated ovens, gradually cooled, prior to application of finish.
   1. Application:
      1. Electrostatically apply urethane powder coat of selected color and bake in controlled high temperature oven to assure a smooth, hard satin finish. Surfaces shall have a chemical resistant, high grade laboratory furniture quality finish of the following thickness:
      1. Liquid, dipped, solvent based finishes are not and will not be acceptable.
   1. Exterior and interior exposed surfaces:
      1.5 mil average and 1.2 mil min.
   1. Backs of cabinets and other surfaces not exposed to view:
      1.2 mil average.
   1. Cabinet Surface Finish Tests:
      1. All casework construction and performance characteristics shall be in full compliance with SEFA 8 standards.
   1. SUBMITTALS
   1. Comply with all Pertinent Provisions of Section 013300.
   1. Shop Drawings:
      1. Provide 3/4" = 1'-0" scale elevations of individual and battery of casework units, cross sections, rough-in and anchor placements, tolerances and clearances. Indicate relation of units to surrounding walls, windows, doors and other building components. Provide 1/4" = 1'-0" rough-in plan drawings for coordination with trades. Rough-in shall show free area.
   1. Product Data:
      1. Submit manufacturer's data for each component and item of laboratory equipment specified. Include component dimensions, configurations, construction details, joint details, and attachments, utility and service requirements and locations.
   1. Product Samples Upon Request:
      1. Submit for approval:
      1. Top Sample.
   1. Finish Sample (3" X 5" Painted Steel).
   1. Finish Samples:
      1. Submit 3” x 5” samples of each color of finish for casework, work surfaces and for other prefinished equipment and accessories for selection by NREL
   1. QUALITY ASSURANCE
   1. Single source responsibility:
      1. Casework, work surfaces, laboratory fume hood and equipment and accessories shall be manufactured or furnished by a single laboratory furniture company.
   1. All casework construction and performance characteristics shall be in full compliance with SEFA 8 – 1999 standards. At the owner’s request, independent, third part testing must be submitted validating compliance and adheres to the architectural specifications.
   1. Manufacturer's qualifications:
      1. Modern plant with proper tools, dies, fixtures and skilled workmen to produce high quality laboratory casework and equipment, and shall meet the following minimum requirements:
      1. Ten years or more experience in manufacture of laboratory casework and equipment of type specified.
   1. Ten installations of equal or larger size and requirements.
   1. Installer's qualifications:
      1. Factory trained and/or certified by the manufacturer.
   1. Cabinet identification:
      1. Cabinets are identified on drawings by manufacturer's catalog numbers. Unless otherwise modified on drawings or in specifications, catalog description constitutes specific requirements for each type of cabinet.
   1. REFERENCE STANDARDS
   1. All casework, worksurface and service fixture construction and performance characteristics shall be in full compliance with SEFA (Scientific Equipment and Furniture Association) standards. At the owner’s request, independent, third party testing must be submitted validating compliance and adheres to the architectural specifications.
   1. SEFA 2.3 – Installation of Scientific Laboratory Furniture and Equipment.
2. SEFA 3 – Work Surfaces
3. SEFA 7 – Laboratory and Hospital Fixtures
4. SEFA 8 – Laboratory Furniture
   1. DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING
   1. Schedule delivery of casework and equipment so that spaces are sufficiently complete that material can be installed immediately following delivery.
   1. Protect finished surfaces from soiling or damage during handling and installation. Keep covered with polyethylene film or other protective coating.
   1. Protect all work surfaces throughout construction period with 1/4" corrugated cardboard completely covering the top and securely taped to edges. Mark cardboard in large lettering "No Standing".
   1. PROJECT CONDITIONS
   1. Do not deliver or install equipment until the following conditions have been met:
      1. Ceiling, overhead ductwork and lighting are installed.
   1. All painting is completed and floor tile is installed.
   1. PRODUCTS
   1. MANUFACTURER
   1. Design, materials, construction and finish of casework specified are the minimum acceptable standard of quality for inset steel laboratory casework. The basis of this product specification is Fisher Hamilton L.L.C., 1316 - 18th Street, Two Rivers, WI 54241.
   1. No approved Substitution.
   1. CASEWORK MATERIALS
   1. Sheet steel:
      1. Mild, cold rolled and leveled unfinished steel.
   1. Minimum gauges:
      1. 20 gauge:
         1. Solid door interior panels, drawer fronts, scribing strips, filler panels, enclosures, drawer bodies, shelves, security panels and sloping tops.
   1. 18 gauge:
      1. Case tops, ends, bottoms, bases, backs, vertical posts, uprights, glazed door members, door exterior panels and access panels.
   1. 16 gauge:
      1. Top front rails, top rear gussets, intermediate horizontal rails, table legs and frames, leg rails and stretchers.
   1. 14 gauge:
      1. Drawer suspensions, door and case hinge reinforcements and front corner reinforcements.
   1. 11 gauge:
      1. Table leg corner brackets and gussets for leveling screws.
   1. Glass for glazed swinging and sliding door

* 6mm Safety Glass - Tempered
   1. CASEWORK FABRICATION
   1. Base Units and Cases:
      1. Base units and 25", 31" and 37" high wall cases:
         1. End panels and back reinforced with internal reinforcing front and rear posts.
   1. 49" and 84" high cases:
      1. Formed end panels with front and rear reinforcing post channels; back shall be formed steel panel, recessed 3/4" for mounting purposes.
   1. Posts:
      1. Front post fully closed with full height reinforcing upright. Shelf adjustment holes in front and rear posts shall be perfectly aligned for level setting, adjustable to 1/2" o.c.
   1. Secure intersection of case members with spot and arc welds. Provide gusset reinforcement at front corners.
   1. Base unit backs:
      1. Provide drawer units without backs and cupboard units with removable backs for access to services behind units.
   1. Base unit backs:
      1. Provide fixed backs at all drawer and cupboard units. At islands and peninsula locations with utility access aisle.
   1. Bottoms:
      1. Base units and 25", 31", 37" and 49" high wall cases shall have one piece bottom with front edge formed into front rail, rabbeted as required for swinging doors and drawers and flush design for sliding doors.
   1. Top rail for base units:
      1. Interlock with end panels, flush with front of unit.
   1. Horizontal intermediate rails:
      1. Recessed behind doors and drawer fronts.
   1. Base for base units:
      1. 4" high x 3" deep with formed steel base and 11 ga. die formed steel gussets at corners. Provide 3/8" diameter leveling screw with integral bottom flange of minimum 0.56 sq. in. area at each corner, accessible through openings in toe space.
   1. Tops of wall cases:
      1. One piece, with front edge formed into front rail.
   1. Drawers:
      1. Drawer fronts:
         1. 3/4" thick, double wall construction, pre-painted prior to assembly and sound deadened.
   1. Drawer bodies:
      1. Bottom and sides formed into one-piece center section with bottom and sides coved and formed top edges. Front and back panels spot welded to center section.
   1. Drawer suspension:
      1. Heavy duty coved raceways for both case and drawer with nylon tired, ball bearing rollers; self-centering and self-closing when open to within 3" of the closed position.
   1. Provide drawer with rubber bumpers. Friction centering devices are not acceptable.
   1. Provide security panels for drawers with keyed different locks.
   1. File drawers:
      1. Provide with 150# full extension slides for full access and operation.
   1. Doors:
      1. Steel
   1. Solid panel doors:
      1. 3/4" thick, double wall, telescoping box steel construction with interior prepainted and sound deadened, top corners welded and ground smooth. Reinforce interior of front panel with welded steel hat channels. Hinges with screws to internal 14 gauge reinforcing in case and door. Hinges shall be removable; welding of hinges not acceptable. Doors shall close against rubber bumpers.
   1. Frame glazed doors:
      1. Outer head to be one piece construction. Inner head to consist of top, bottom and side framing members which are removable for installation or replacement of glass. Provide continuous vinyl glazing retainer to receive glass. In all other respects, framed glazed door construction and quality shall match solid panel doors.
   1. Shelves:
      1. Form front and back edges down and back 3/4". Form ends down 3/4”.
   1. Reinforce shelves over 36" long with welded hat channel reinforcement the full width of shelf.
   1. Pull out shelves:
      1. Same suspension as specified for drawers.
   1. Base molding:
      1. 4" high, to be furnished and installed by flooring contractor.
   1. Hardware:
      1. Drawer and hinged door pulls:
         1. Clear anodized extruded aluminum, screw attached on 4" centers.
   1. Pull Location:
      1. Horizontal at drawers, vertical at doors.
   1. Pull Types - Available in Configuration 1 & 2 Only
   1. Brushed Aluminum rectangular style finger pull
   1. Hinges:
      1. Institutional type, five knuckle projecting barrel hinges, minimum 2-1/2" long, type 302 or 304 stainless steel. Provide two hinges for doors up to 36" high; three hinges for doors over 36" high. Drill each leaf for three screw attachment to door and frame.
   1. Door catches:
      1. Adjustable type, spring actuated nylon roller catches.
   1. Elbow catches:
      1. Spring type of cadmium plated steel, with strike of suitable design.
   1. Locks:
      1. National Lock Remove-A-Core 5-disc [Optional:
      1. 5-pin] tumbler, heavy duty cylinder type. Exposed lock noses shall be dull nickel (satin) plated and stamped with identifying numbers.
   1. Keying:
      1. Locks shall have capacity for 225 primary key changes. Master key one level with the potential of 40 different, non-interchangeable master key groups.
   1. Keys:
      1. Stamped brass available from manufacturer or local locksmith, and supplied in the following quantities unless otherwise specified:
      1. 3 - for each group keyed alike locks.
   1. Label holders:
      1. Formed steel with satin chrome finish, 1" x 1-1/2", screw installed.
   1. Shelf clips:
      1. Die formed steel, zinc plated, designed to engage in shelf adjustment holes.
   1. METAL FINISH
   1. Metal finish:
      1. Preparation:
         1. Spray clean metal with a heated cleaner/phosphate solution, pre-treat with iron phosphate spray, water rinse, and neutral final seal. Immediately dry in heated ovens, gradually cooled, prior to application of finish.
    1. Application:
       1. Electrostatically apply urethane powder coat of selected color and bake in controlled high temperature oven to assure a smooth, hard satin finish. Surfaces shall have a chemical resistant, high grade laboratory furniture quality finish of the following thickness:
       1. Liquid, dipped, solvent based finishes are not and will not be acceptable.
   1. Exterior and interior exposed surfaces:
      1.5 mil average and 1.2 mil min.
   1. Backs of cabinets and other surfaces not exposed to view:
      1.2 mil average.
   1. Cabinet Surface Finish Tests:
      1. All casework construction and performance characteristics shall be in full compliance with SEFA 8 – 1999 standards.
   1. WORK SURFACES
   1. All tops to be solid epoxy resin; intergrally molded from modified thermosetting black epoxy resin. Specially compounded and oven cured.
   1. Thickness:
      1. 1” (25mm)
   1. Edges:
      1. Radiused Edges
   1. Curbs:
      1. Form curb at islands; butt curb at wall
   1. SINKS, DRAINS AND TRAPS
   1. Solid Epoxy Resin; under counter
   1. LABORATORY FITTINGS
   1. See Division 22.
   1. ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT
   1. Pegboards:
      1. Board:
         1. Epoxy resin board finished on face and edges. Where exposed, finish back with slightly different surface texture and bevel bottom edges.
   1. Pegs:
      1. Black polypropylene pegs in 5", 6-1/2" and 8" lengths, with glassware protector base. Base of pegs shall be two prong style for mechanical attachment. Do not bond pegs to board.
   1. VACUUM PUMP STORAGE
   1. Construction:
      1. Surfaces of doors, flush panel faces shall align with cabinet fronts without overlap of case ends or top rail. Horizontal and vertical case shell members (panels and top rails) shall meet in the same plane without overlap, cracks or crevices.
   1. Front width of end panels and top rail - 3/4".
   1. Completely welded shell assembly without applied panels at ends, backs or top panel, so that cases can be used interchangeably or as a single, stand-alone unit.
   1. Acoustically treated sides, back and top panel with sound deadening materials.
   1. Fabrication:
      1. Vacuum pump storage to provide a means to store and vent vacuum pumps and their emissions and heat loads.
   1. Vacuum pump cabinet shall have hinged doors with integral toe space without a cabinet bottom. Vacuum pump cabinet shall have removable back panel(s) for utility access and visual inspection. Back panel shall incorporate an integral 2-½“ vent hole for a separate vent assembly.
   1. Vacuum pump cabinet shall incorporate acoustical insulation on the interior door panels, sides, back and underside of the top panel. Insulation shall be an open cell foam of clonal design.
   1. Storage unit shall incorporate an integral electrical switch (120V, 20 amp) with pilot light to indicate the operational mode of the vacuum pump unit.
   1. Storage unit shall have an electrical duplex outlet, located in the rear of the cabinet, for the vacuum pump plug end. Outlet to be accessible from the inside of the cabinet. Outlet shall be hard wired to the electrical switch.
   1. Separate mobile platform shall be capable of supporting 300 lbs. Front two casters shall be locking/swivel models. Lipped construction shall safely contain any accidental spills.
   1. Door louvers will be incorporated when the exhaust fan is specified.
   1. Switch shall be supplied with an optional 20’ long, ½” trade size flexible metal conduit.
   1. Provide 235 cfm exhaust fan. The exhaust fan assembly will be attached to exterior of the cabinet. The fan assembly shall incorporate a 4” diameter duct collar connection. Fan shall vent to building space.
   1. Vacuum Pump Cabinet Nominal Dimensions:
      1. Width:
         1. 24”; Depth:
         1. 25” with electrical junction box, 29-5/8” with exhaust fan housing; Height:
         1. 35.166”
   1. Mobile Pump Platform Nominal Dimensions::
      1. Width:
         1. 21”; Depth:
         1. 17-7/8”; Height:
         1. 5-3/4”
   1. EXECUTION
   1. INSTALLATION
   1. Casework installation:
      1. Set casework components plumb, square, and straight with no distortion and securely anchored to building structure. Shim as required using concealed shims.
   1. Bolt continuous cabinets together with joints flush, tight and uniform, and with alignment of adjacent units within 1/16" tolerance.
   1. Secure wall cabinets to solid supporting material, not to plaster, lath or gypsum board.
   1. Abut top edge surfaces in one true plane. Provide flush joints not to exceed 1/8" between top units.
   1. Work surface installation:
      1. Where required due to field conditions, scribe to abutting surfaces.
   1. Only factory prepared field joints, located per approved shop drawings, shall be permitted. Secure joints in field, where practicable, in the same manner as in factory, with dowels, splines, adhesive or fasteners recommended by manufacturer.
   1. Secure work surfaces to casework and equipment components with material and procedures recommended by the manufacturer.
   1. Sink installation:
      1. Sinks which were not factory installed shall be set in chemical resistant sealing compound and secured and supported per manufacturer's recommendations.
   1. Accessory installation:
      1. Install accessories and fittings in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. Turn screws to seat flat; do not drive.
   1. ADJUSTING
   1. Repair or remove and replace defective work, as directed by NREL upon completion of installation.
   1. Adjust doors, drawers, hardware, fixtures and other moving or operating parts to function smoothly.
   1. CLEANING
   1. Clean shop finished casework, touch up as required.
   1. Clean countertops with diluted dishwashing liquid and water leaving tops free of all grease and streaks. Use no wax or oils.
   1. PROTECTION OF FINISHED WORK
   1. Provide all necessary protective measures to prevent exposure of casework and equipment from exposure to other construction activity.
   1. Advise contractor of procedures and precautions for protection of material, installed laboratory casework and fixtures from damage by work of other trades.
1. END OF SECTION

