---
title: High Altitude Soil Preparation
section: '329113.11'
divNumb: 32
divName: Exterior Improvements
subgroup: Site and Infrastructure
tags: ['Site', 'Infrastructure', 'Exterior', 'Improvements', 'High', 'Altitude', 'Soil', 'Preparation']
---


   1. high altitude SOIL PREPARATION

## General

1. SUMMARY
   1. Work in this Section includes, ripping, fertilizing, soil conditioning, and fine grading as shown on plans and details, included on construction drawings, as under this contract.

	1. SUBMITTALS
   1. Submit product data sheet for compost.

	1. DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING
   1. Comply with related sections

	1. PROJECT/SITE CONDITIONS
		1. Do not perform work when climate and existing site conditions will not provide satisfactory results.
		2. Vehicular accessibility on site shall be as directed by the Owner’s Representative. Repair damage to prepared ground and surface caused by vehicular movement during work under this section to original condition at no additional cost to the Owner.

## Products

	1. materials
		1. Compost
			1. A totally organic product that has been aerobically and naturally processed without the addition of coarse wood chips, in such a manner as to maintain a consistent temperature of 140 degrees Fahrenheit or greater for a period of time sufficient to create the following characteristics, measured by dry weight.
			1. Moisture content of 30%-35%
			2. Organic matter to nitrogen ratio: 25:1 to 30:1.
			3. pH: 6.0 to 8.0 pH.
			4. Salts: maximum of 10 mmhos/cm.
			5. Less than 1% soil, dirt or sand.
			6. Maximum particle size of ½ inch diameter.
			7. Eradication of all harmful weed seeds, pathogens and bacteria.
			8. A non-offensive, earth smell.
			2. Acceptable materials are as follows.
			1. A-1 Organics - Premium 3
			2. Front Range Materials (Arvada, Colorado, 303-425-9992)– Ground Compost (Item #18-126)
			3. Certified “Class I” compost product
			4. Or Approved Equal.
		2. Topsoil
			1. Import topsoil in sufficient quantities to complete the work. Obtain independent soils test which will recommend amendments required to meet the following qualifications. Amend topsoil per soils laboratory recommendations.
			1. Composition: Use as a planting medium, only fertile, friable, well-drained soil, or uniform quality, free of stones over 1 in. diameter, sticks, oils, chemicals, plaster, concrete, and other deleterious materials, with an acidity range between pH 5.5 and 7.0. It shall contain sand and clay in approximately equal proportions, and shall have some organic content by weight.
		3. Plant Mix Backfill for Trees
			1. Plant mix shall be used to backfill around all tree plantings as indicated on the drawings. The plant mix shall consist of equal parts (a), (b), (c), plus (d) not accounted for in that ratio.
			1. Topsoil
			2. Compost
			3. Excavated soil
			4. Myke Pro AN1 ([www.usemyke.com](http://www.usemyke.com)) at the manufacturer’s recommended rate for the tree’s size/caliper
   1. Caliper / Height
   1. Myke Pro

   1. Cups Each
5. in (40 mm)
   1. 2
0. in (50 mm)
   1. 3
5. in (65 mm)
   1. 4
0. in (75 mm)
   1. 5
0. in (100 mm)
   1. 6
5. in (115 mm)
5.
   1. 4'
75.
   1. 5'
   1. 2
   1. 6'
   1. 3
   1. 7'
5.
   1. 8'
   1. 4
   1. 10'
   1. 5
   1. 12'
   1. 6
   1. 14'
5.

			1. The ingredients shall be thoroughly mixed to produce a mix as integrated as possible.
		1. Bluegrass sod, Ecoloturf and irrigated bluegrass seed areas:
			1. Spread topsoil over area to be planted to the minimum depths indicated below and mix thoroughly into the soil surface by means of a rototiller or agricultural ripper with tines spaced at no greater than 18 inches.
			1. 4” depth topsoil.
			2. Spread uniform course sand to a depth of 2” on top of topsoil. Thoroughly mix sand with topsoil tilled to a depth of 8 inches. 
			3. Thoroughly mix the following amendments tilled to a depth of 8 inches. 
			1. Specified Compost 4.0 c.y. per 1,000 s.f.
		2. Naturalized seed areas
			1. Spread topsoil over area to be planted to the minimum depths indicated below and mix thoroughly into the soil surface by means of a rototiller or agricultural ripper with tines spaced at no greater than 18 inches.
			1. 2” depth topsoil.
			2. All seed areas shall receive “Biosol 6-1-3” organic fertilizer at the time of seeding at a rate of 1,000 pounds per acre. If soils test identify more or less fertilizer required, the contractor will be expected to submit a change order to adjust the contract price for a credit or overage. 
			3. Specified Compost 2.0 c.y. per 1,000 s.f.
			4. Thoroughly mix till the areas to a depth of six inches.
		3. Perennial Planting Bed Amendments
			1. Spread plant mix over area to be planted to the minimum depths indicated below and mix thoroughly into the soil surface by means of a rototiller or agricultural ripper with tines spaced at no greater than 18 inches.
			1. 8” depth plant mix.
			2. Plant Mix shall consist of equal parts of the following:
      1. Topsoil
   1. Compost
   1. Sawdust, untreated, well rotted

			1. Thoroughly mix the following amendments tilled to a depth of eight inches
			1. Diammonium Phosphate 5.0 lbs. per 1,000 s.f.
			2. Pre-emergent Weed Controller use manufacturer’s specified rate.
		1. Shrub Planting Bed Amendments
			1. Plant mix shall be used to backfill around all shrub plantings as indicated on the drawings. The plant mix shall consist of equal parts (a), (b), (c).
			1. Topsoil
			2. Compost
			3. Excavated soil.
			2. Thoroughly mix the following amendments tilled to a depth of six inches
			1. Specified Compost 4.0 c.y. per 1,000 s.f.
			2. Diammonium Phosphate 5.0 lbs. per 1,000 s.f.
	1. source quality control
		1. Verification of Performance
			1. Compost and other soil amendments are typically identified by a rate of cubic yards per 1000 s.f. In order to accurately determine if amendments are applied at the correct rate, the following chart is supplied. This chart is intended to verify the cubic yards by allowing a method for measuring the depth of the material spread uniformly across the surface of the planting area, with no exposed soil, prior to mixing the amendments with the existing soils. 
			2. This method will be used during inspections to verify that adequate amendments are incorporated into the soil.
   1. c.y./1000 s.f.
   1. Depth (inches)
0. c.y./1000 s.f.
   1. 1 inch
0. c.y./1000 s.f.
   1. 1 ¼ inches
0. c.y./1000 s.f.
   1. 1 ½ inches

			1. An inspection of soil preparation will be performed by the Owner’s Representative before areas will be released for planting. The inspection shall consist taking a soil sample to determine
			1. Proper tilling of the soil. Soil will be judged on how easily a soil probe can be inserted into the ground.
			2. Proper depth of tilling, and homogeneity of the soil. The soil sample will be judged on uniformity of the soil profile in the top six to eight inches.
			3. A visual inspection for adequate compost will be conducted. An area that has similar soil structures, that has not received compost will be used as the basis of comparison. Should a disagreement exist, multiple soil samples will be sent to an independent testing laboratory to determine the amount of organic matter present. The cost of this testing will be absorbed by the Owner’s Representative.

## Execution

	1. EXAMINATION
		
## General


			1. Verify that existing site conditions are as specified and indicated before beginning work under this Section.
			2. Unknown soil conditions may exist on site. This specification is intended to be a standard specification for Soil Preparation for bid purposes only. The contractor shall be responsible for creating a suitable soil medium that ensures healthy plant growth. Immediately following rough grading operations, the contractor shall take multiple soil samples of the site to identify any chemical, structural, or other soil borne issues that would make the soil counterproductive to healthy plant growth. This analysis shall include recommendations for additional organic matter required for the soil. Should amendments or additional work be required to make these soils more conducive to healthy plant growth, the contractors shall submit a change order for the modification 30 days prior to start of landscape installation for Owner’s Approval. The change order request shall clearly detail any additional work or amendments necessary for those unacceptable soils.
		2. Grades
   1. Inspect to verify rough grading is within +0.1 foot of grades indicated and specified.

		1. Damaged Earth
   1. Inspect to verify that earth rendered unfit to receive planting due to concrete, water, mortar, limewater or any other contaminant dumped on it has been removed and replaced with clean earth from a source approved by the Owner’s Representative.

		1. Cleanliness
   1. Inspect to verify that site is clean of all trash and debris.

		1. Equipment
   1. Inspect to verify other trades have removed all equipment and staging areas from areas of work.

		1. Unsatisfactory Conditions
   1. Report in writing to General Contractor with copy to Owner.

		1. Acceptance
   1. Beginning of installation means acceptance of existing conditions by installer.

	1. PREPARATION
		1. Protection
			1. Locate sewer, water, irrigation, gas, electric, phone and other pipelines or conduits and equipment prior to commencing work.
			2. Be responsible for proper repair to landscape, utilities, walls, pavements and other site improvements damaged by operations under this section.
		2. Weed Control
			1. Remove weeds by applying herbicide 1 week before soil preparation and as needed, but no sooner than 3 months before beginning work.
			2. If the area to be developed is infested with noxious or invasive weeds, a chemical application will be required, at a rate recommended on the chemical’s product label.
			3. The contractor shall remove all weeds prior to tilling or spreading any soil amendments. All dead plant material shall be removed from the site and not tilled into the soil.
		3. Surface Grade
   1. Remove weeds, debris, clods and rocks larger than 1". Dispose of accumulated debris at direction of owner or Owner’s Representative.

		1. Runoff
   1. Take measures and furnish equipment and labor necessary to control the flow, drainage, and accumulation of water. Insure that all water will run off the grades.

		1. Erosion Control
			1. Take measures and furnish equipment and labor necessary to control and prevent soil erosion, blowing soil and accumulation of wind-deposited material on the site throughout duration of work.
			2. No areas of the site may remain unprotected for more than 30 days, or as directed by the storm water management plan.
			3. The contractor shall assume maintenance and management responsibilities for erosion control in an area upon commencement of activities in that area. Erosion control practices must be compliant with Douglas County, the GESC plan, and any Storm Water Management Plans/Programs in place.
			4. The contractor will be expected to begin repair to damaged erosion control devices, siltation, wash outs, etc. with in twenty four hours of a storm event or upon notification by the Owner’s Representative.
	1. INSTALLATION
		1. Soil Amendment
   1. Evenly distribute topsoil, soil amendments, conditioners, and fertilizer, and first application of fertilizer in landscaped areas at the rates outlined in Part 2.01 of this Section.

		1. Mixing
   1. After applying soil conditioner, fertilizers, and compost thoroughly till area to depth of 6" minimum by tilling, plowing, harrowing, or disking until soil is well pulverized and thoroughly mixed.

		1. Fine Grading in all Landscape Areas:
			1. Do fine grading for areas prior to planting.
			2. For ground surface areas surrounding buildings to be landscaped, maintain required positive drainage away from buildings.
			3. Establish finish grades to within 0.04 foot of grades indicated.
			4. Fine grading must be inspected and approved by Owner’s Representative.
			5. Any damage caused by inclement weather, to finish grades before inspection, will be repaired by the contractor, prior to acceptance by Owner’s Representative.
			6. Sodded areas - Allow 1" for sod.
		2. Noxious weeds or parts thereof shall not be present in the surface grade prior to landscaping.
		3. Prior to acceptance of grades, hand rake to smooth, even surface free of debris, clods, rocks, and vegetable matter greater than 1".
	1. Field quality control
		1. Inspection
			1. Provide notice to Owner’s Representative requesting inspection at least seven (7) calendar days prior to anticipated date of completion.
			2. The following required inspections will be conducted to ensure proper preparation of soil, prior to planting.
			1. During, or after, the first cultivation
			2. After the application of specified soil amendments.
			3. During, or after, the second cultivation
			4. After the final grades have been established
		2. Deficiencies
   1. Owner’s Representative will specify deficiencies to Contractor who shall make satisfactory adjustments and shall again notify Owner’s Representative for final inspection.

	1. CLEANING
   1. Remove debris and excess materials from site. Clean out drainage inlet structures. Clean paved and finished surfaces soiled as a result of work under this Section, in accordance with direction given by Owner’s Representative.

	1. PROTECTION
   1. Provide and install barriers as required and as directed by Owner’s Representative to protect completed areas against damage from pedestrian and vehicular traffic until acceptance by Owner. Contractor is not responsible for malicious destruction caused by others.
   

