---
title: Plants
section: '329300'
divNumb: 32
divName: Exterior Improvements
subgroup: Site and Infrastructure
tags: ['Site', 'Infrastructure', 'Exterior', 'Improvements', 'Plants']
---


## General

1. SUMMARY
   1. Section Includes
   1. Plant materials
   1. Backfill materials
   1. Mulching
   1. Edging
   1. Related Sections
   1. Section 328400 – Planting Irrigation
   1. Section 329200 - Turf and Grasses
1. SUBMITTALS
   1. Quality Control Submittals
   1. Comply with Section 01330.
   1. Certificates
   1. State, federal or other inspection certificates shall accompany invoice for material showing source and/or origin.
   1. Submit to Owner prior to acceptance of material.
   1. Samples
   1. Submit the following samples to three (3) weeks prior to delivery to site.
   1. Geotextile fabric
5." Desert Blend Rock Mulch
1. QUALITY ASSURANCE
   1. Source Quality Control
   1. Trees, Shrubs and Plants:
      1. Comply with current recommendations and requirements of ANSI “American Standard for Nursery Stock”.
   1. Provide healthy, vigorous stock, grown in accordance with good horticultural practice and free of Disease, Insects, Eggs, Larvae and Defects such as:
      1. Knots
   1. Sun-scald
   1. Injuries
   1. Abrasions
   1. Disfigurement.
   1. Label each tree and shrub with waterproof tag bearing legible designation of botanical and common name.
   1. Inspection
   1. Subject to inspection and acceptance.
   1. Owner reserves right to reject at any time or place prior to final project acceptance, any and all materials which in Owner's opinion fail to meet these Specification requirements.
   1. Inspection is primarily for quality; however, other requirements are not waived even though visual inspection results in acceptance.
   1. Promptly remove rejected materials from site.
   1. PROJECT/SITE CONDITIONS
   1. Vehicular accessibility on site shall be as directed by Owner.
   1. Repair damage to prepared grounds and surfaces caused by vehicular movement during work under this Section to original condition at no additional cost to Owner.
   1. Do not perform work when climate and existing site conditions will not provide satisfactory results.
1. WARRANTY
   1. For one full growing season and at no additional cost to the Owner, the Contractor shall replace any trees, shrubs or groundcovers that are dead, or that are, in the opinion of the Owner, in unhealthy or unsightly condition or that have lost their natural shape due to dead branches or excessive pruning of dead branches.
   1. Replacement of the plantings shall be in accordance with the original specifications and shall be paid for by Contractor.
   1. MAINTENANCE
   1. Materials shall conform to Specifications or otherwise be acceptable to Owner.
   1. As required, provide weed control using selective herbicides approved by Owner.

## Products

   1. MATERIALS
   1. Rock Mulch
5." Desert Blend Rock Mulch.
   1. 4" deep in areas indicated on drawings.
   1. Geotextile Fabric:
      1. Mirafi 140S or accepted substitute.
   1. Steel Edger
   1. 3/16" thick, 4" deep, 16'-0" length, non-painted Ryerson Steel Edger or accepted substitute.
   1. Provide punched holes for drainage.
   1. Provide steel stakes for supports.

## Execution

1. EXAMINATION
   1. Verify that existing conditions are as specified and indicated before beginning work under this Contract.
   1. Verify acceptance of final grades prior to beginning planting operations. Bring areas to be planted to lines and grade designated or accepted by Owner before staking any plant materials.
   1. Percolation
   1. Final earth placement conditions onsite require pre-installation planting pit drainage testing.
   1. Contractor is to excavate planting pits per plant locations, filling and observing water retention in each pit. If water does not evacuate hole by natural percolation within two (2) hours, Contractor is to contact Owner to discuss the addition of a pit sub drainage system. Failure to conduct this test and merely planting means Contractor accepts full responsibility for plant fatalities due to poor sub base drainage.
   1. Report in writing to the General Contractor with a copy to the Owner unsatisfactory conditions.
   1. Beginning of installation means acceptance of existing conditions by Contractor.
1. PREPARATION
   1. Stake plant locations and obtain acceptance by Owner, if required, before planting holes are prepared.
   1. Place plant material according to planting plans or as directed by Owner. Do not place material in swale flow lines.
   1. Interference
   1. Plant Placement
   1. Do not interfere with sprinkler irrigation coverage, with piping or other equipment.
   1. Locate planting as indicated except when obstructions above or below ground are encountered or where changes have been made in construction.
   1. If plant relocation is necessary due to interference with utility boxes or pits, underground piping or wiring, or sprinkler head coverage, etc., relocate at direction of Owner. Owner must approve precise locations of plants prior to pit excavation and installation.
   1. Do not begin planting until deficiencies are corrected or plants replaced.
   1. Protection
   1. Be responsible for proper repair of underground pipe, electric wiring, or other subsurface improvements damaged by operations under this Section.
   1. Be responsible for proper repair to walls, pavements and any other structural surfaces damaged by operations under this Section.
   1. Pay for repairs made by Contractors designated by Owner.
   1. Be responsible for replacement of vandalized materials not yet installed. Report all cases of vandalism promptly to the Owner.
   1. ERECTION INSTALLATION APPLICATION
   1. Planting beds shall be backfilled in accordance with Section 329200.
   1. Excavation for Planting
   1. Shape
   1. Hand-dug Plant Pits
   1. Circular
   1. Vertical sides
   1. Flat bottom.
   1. Backhoe Dug Pits
   1. Orient in opposite direction to tree stake alignment, vertical sides where stakes occur and flat bottom.
   1. Backfill and compact over excavation ends to match existing fill.
   1. Size
   1. Trees:
      1. Depth of root ball with width as indicated.
   1. Shrubs:
      1. Depth of root ball.
   1. Minimum Width or Diameter:
      1. 12" greater than diameter of ball or container.
   1. Preparation
   1. Scarify "glazed" planting pit walls and scarify bottom of pit to minimum 2" depth.
   1. Remove rocks greater than 2”, which occur at bottom of pit.
   1. Backfill planting pits with sufficient planting pit backfill mix to raise bottom surface grade of pit 3" when compacted. Compact to 85% Standard Proctor Density within 2% optimum moisture.
   1. Dispose of unacceptable or unused excess soils or rock off site or as directed by Owner.
1. Planting
   2. General
   3. Center plant in pit.
   4. Face for best effect.
   5. Set plant plumb and hold rigidly in position until soil has been lightly tamped around ball or container roots.
   6. Use plant backfill mix, if specified, for backfill.
   7. Backfill mix is specified in Section 329200.
   8. Backfill pit with planting mixture, until two-thirds full and water thoroughly to settle soil.
   9. After soil settles, fill pit with planting backfill, water and shape surface so that it slopes to drain from trunk and matches the ground at the edge of planting pit.
   10. Do not compact backfill mix by tamping.
   11. Watering Basin
   12. Construct a topsoil berm 3" above finish grade, forming a watering basin around each plant.
   13. Size:
      1. 24" greater than diameter of ball or container roots.
   14. Balled and Burlapped Plants (B&B)
   15. Place in pit on firmly compacted soil.
   16. Place with burlap intact so location of ground line at top of ball is 2" higher than finish grade.
   17. Cut and remove burlap or cloth, ropes, wires and other wrapping materials from top 2/3 of ball. Cut wire as near to base of ball as possible.
   18. Do not pull wrapping from under ball.
   19. Do not plant if ball is cracked or broken before or during planting process.
   20. Container-Grown Plants
   21. Can Removal
   22. Knockout Cans
   23. Do not cut sides.
   24. Tap can and gently remove plant.
   25. Straight-Side Cans
   26. Cut cans on two (2) sides with acceptable can cutter.
   27. Do not cut with spade or ax.
   28. Plastic Containers
   29. Invert semi-dry plant and root system and carefully remove container after tapping.
   30. Carefully remove plants without injury or damage to root ball. After removing plant, vertically score root ball using a sharp knife, about 1/4" deep and every 2" to 3" in circumference.
   31. Biodegradable container installations must be accepted prior to planting.
   32. Dig planting holes as specified.
   33. Hand place plants on firmly compacted soil.
   34. Hand backfill and hand tamp leaving slight depression around outer circumference of planting area.
   35. Mulching and Edging
   36. Mulching
   37. Mulch within two (2) days after planting.
   38. Tree Pits (in seeded and sodded areas only)
   39. Mulch to cover planting pit diameter around each tree location outside planting beds.
   40. Compact mulch to 4" depth.
   41. Tree Well:
      2. Circular.
   42. Groundcover Beds
   43. Mulch areas indicated throughout and compact to 4" depth unless otherwise indicated.
   44. Geotextile
   45. Install smooth without wrinkles or bulges.
   46. Overlap 18" at seams.
   47. Turn up 3" at edges of curbing and at edge of building and turn down at steel edging, just beyond downhill edge of planting bed. Laps shall be made with uphill layer on top. Full rolls shall be used wherever possible, in order to minimize the number of vertical laps. Length and widths of individual sheets shall be at the Contractor's option.
   48. Staple along edges and seams at 3'-0" o.c. with "U" shaped 9 gauge wire. Staple to penetrate 6" in depth minimum.
   49. Shrub Bed Edging
   50. Install at depth so top of edger matches top of curbs, sidewalks and mowed turf areas.
   51. When edger abuts curbs or walks, cut so end is straight and rests flush against these surfaces.
   52. Stake steel edger at Manufacturer's recommended intervals.
   53. Anti-desiccant:
      3. Apply anti-desiccant, using power spray, to provide an adequate film over trunks, branches, stems, twigs and foliage.
   54. If deciduous trees or shrubs are moved when in full leaf, spray with anti-desiccant at nursery before moving and spray again 2 weeks after planting.
   55. Guying and Staking of Trees
   56. Stake all trees on plant list.
2. General
   1. Stake installation as indicated with irregular ridge facing away from tree center.
   2. Drive stakes into undisturbed soil just beyond backfill and slightly out of plumb away from tree center. Pull stakes into final plumb when attaching guying wire.
   3. Binder twine is not permitted for tying trees to stakes.
   4. Staking Deciduous Trees
   5. Stake on two (2) sides for trees 3" caliper or less and on three (3) sides for trees greater than 3" caliper.
   6. Stakes:
      1. Project 5'-0" (minimum) above ground and secured to tree as indicated.
   7. Do not puncture root ball.
   8. Staking Evergreen Trees
   9. Stake on two (2) sides of trees 6'-0" tall, and on three (3) sides for trees 6'-0" and taller.
   10. Secure to tree with strap and galvanized wire at approximate midpoint of trunk carefully avoiding damage to needles and branches.
   11. Tying and Cross-Bracing
   12. Tie trees with double strand of guy wire run through grommets of appropriate length of cotton/nylon webbing strap placed at approximately 4'-6" above finish grade on deciduous trees and at approximate midpoint of trunk on evergreen trees.
   13. Pruning
   14. Licensed tree surgeon shall prune trees as necessary immediately following installation.
   15. New Plant Material
   16. Prune minimum necessary to remove injured twigs and branches, deadwood, and suckers and as required to insure healthy plant representative of species and in keeping with accepted horticulture practice.
   17. Prune any damaged or dead roots or branches back to and slightly above, nearest healthy side bud, but at angle from remaining portion not exceeding 45 degrees.
   18. Trim only damaged or dead foliage and/or branches from Evergreens.
   19. Do not prune leaders. On cuts over 1" diameter, trace injury back to living tissue, smooth and treat with accepted tree wound dressing.
   20. Remove and replace excessively pruned or misformed stock resulting from improper pruning at the direction of the owner.
   21. FIELD QUALITY CONTROL
   22. Inspection
   23. Provide notice to Owner requesting inspection at least seven (7) days prior to anticipated date of completion.
   24. All planting must be alive and healthy in order to be considered complete.
   25. Deficiencies
   26. Owner will specify deficiencies to Contractor, who shall make satisfactory adjustments, and shall again notify Owner for final inspection.
   27. CLEANING
   28. Remove debris and excess materials from site.
   29. Clean paved and finished surfaces soiled by work of this Section.
   30. After final acceptance, remove plant tags from plants.
   31. PROTECTION
   32. Contractor is not responsible for malicious destruction of planting after installation, until final acceptance. Report cases of vandalism promptly to Owner.
   33. Inform Owner in writing if special plant protection must be installed to secure planting from damage after Owner assumes responsibility for maintenance.
   
   
