---
title: Concrete Pressure Water Pipe
section: '400539.13'
divNumb: 40
divName: Process Interconnections
subgroup: Process Equipment
tags: ['Process', 'Equipment', 'Interconnections', 'Concrete', 'Pressure', 'Water', 'Pipe']
---

   1. Section 40 05 39.13
   1. Concrete Pressure Water Pipe

## General


	1. RELATED DOCUMENTS
   1. Drawings, General and Special Provisions of the Contract, and Division 01 Specification
Sections apply to this Section.
2. SUMMARY
   1. This Section includes bar-wrapped steel-cylinder concrete pressure pipe for the discharge line to
Skeleton Creek identified as R1 or RCP on the Drawings. This an alternative to centrifugally cast
   1. fiberglass-reinforced polymer mortar pipe specified in section 400519.
   1. Related Sections include the following:
      1. Section 400514 – “Common Work Results for Process Piping”
3. SUBMITTALS
   1. Submit the following in accordance with Conditions of the Contract and Division 1
Specification Sections:
      1. Manufacturer’s product data.
2. Installation instructions and layout schedule.
3. Certification signed by manufacturer that the pipe and fittings meet specification
   1. requirements.
4. DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING
   1. All concrete piping materials shall be stored in accordance with manufacturer’s
recommendations.
   1. Store rubber gaskets in a cool shelter, out of the sun and away from fuel oil and gasoline.

## Product

1. MANUFACTURERS
   1. Subject to compliance with requirements, manufacturers offering products that may be
incorporated into the Work include the following:
      1. Hanson Pipe & Products, Inc.
2. Approved equal
2. PIPING SYSTEM
   1. The pipe shall conform to the requirements of AWWA C303 and shall be designed in
accordance with the procedures in AWWA Manual M9, Chapter 7. The pipe shall meet the
   1. following conditions:
      1. Pipe inside diameter:
         1. 48 inches
   1. Working pressure:
      1. 10 psi
   1. Test pressure:
      1. 20 psi
   1. Earth load:
      1. 3 ft to 15 ft.
   1. Live load:
      1. H-20 loading
   1. Fittings and special pipe sections shall be designed and fabricated to the requirements of the
requirements of the appropriate AWWA standards and AWWA Manual M9, Chapter 8, as
   1. applicable and as shown on the drawings.
   1. The inside of each pipe section, fitting, and special pipe section shall be plainly marked with the
pipe diameter and pressure class for which the item is designed. In addition, all fittings and
   1. special pipe sections shall be marked with an identifying number or station corresponding to
   1. that shown on the layout schedule. All fittings and special sections requiring special field
   1. orientation shall be properly marked.
   1. Pipe sections may be furnished from inventory if they meet the design requirements with the
appropriate certification.

## Execution

1. INSTALLATION
   1. Pipe shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s written instructions. Trench width
and bedding shall be as shown on the drawings.
   1. Before laying each joint of pipe, the bell and spigot shall be thoroughly cleaned by wire
brushing and wiping until clan and dry. The bell, spigot and joint gasket shall be lubricated
   1. with a nontoxic water-soluble lubricant. The gasket shall be placed in the spigot grove and
   1. tension in the gasket shall be equalized by inserting a smooth round rod under the gasket and
   1. moving it completely around the circumference of the joint. The spigot end of the pipe shall be
   1. centered with the bell of the last, previously laid pipe and pushed into position. Following
   1. assembly, the pipe joint shall be checked with a feeler gauge to ensure the gasket remains seated
   1. in the spigot groove. If the gasket is found to be displaced, the joint shall be removed, the
   1. gasket inspected, the joint re-laid, and the gasket position rechecked. The joint shall then be
   1. checked to assure the proper amount of joint engagement has been achieved. Upon completion
   1. of the pipe jointing, the interior of the pipe shall be cleaned of all debris.
   1. The interior joints shall be pointed with Portland cement mortar. Prior to placing of mortar, any
dirt or trash which has collected in the joint shall be cleaned out and surface of the joint space
   1. shall be moistened with water by spraying or brushing with a wet brush. The joint recess shall
   1. be filled with mortar and finished smooth after the joint is engaged. Careful inspection shall be
   1. made of each joint to insure a smooth, continuous interior surface.
   1. The exterior joints shall be protected with Portland cement mortar. Prior to placing of mortar,
any dirt or trash which has collected in the joint shall be cleaned out and surface of the joint
   1. space shall be moistened with water by spraying or brushing with a wet brush. A grout band
   1. shall be placed around the pipe and positioned to straddle the joint recess. The band shall be of
   1. sufficient length to essentially encircle the pipe and shall be secured in such a manner that the
   1. joint mortar will be contained with little or no leakage. For raised bell pipe, there shall be no
   1. additional bedding or backfill material placed on either side of the pipe until after the mortar
   1. band is filled and the mortar has mechanically stiffened. The band shall be completely filled
   1. with mortar in one operation by filling from one side only until the mortar rises on the opposite
   1. side, and then rodded or agitated on both sides of the pipe alternatively to settle the mortar. The
   1. mortar shall then not be agitated for at least 15 minutes to allow excess water to seep through
   1. the grout band and to allow the mortar to mechanically stiffen. After this period, more mortar
   1. shall be added, if necessary, to fill the joint completely. The gap at the top of the joint band
   1. shall be protected from penetration of backfill into the mortar either by allowing the mortar to
   1. stiffen, or by capping with a stiff mortar mix, or by covering with a structurally protective
      1. The band shall not be removed from the joint.
   1. The mortar used at all joint shall consist of one-part Portland cement to no more than three parts
clean sand mixed with water. Interior joint mortar shall be mixed with as little water as possible
   1. so, the mortar will be very stiff but workable. Exterior joint mortar shall be mixed with water
   1. until it has the consistency of thick cream. During periods of cold weather, the joint mortar shall
   1. be adequately protected from freezing.
   1. To avoid pipe displacement, bedding and backfill shall be placed and consolidated at essentially
the same rate on both sides of the pipe.

