---
title: Resilient-Seated Gate Valves
section: '400561.23'
divNumb: 40
divName: Process Interconnections
subgroup: Process Equipment
tags: ['Process', 'Equipment', 'Interconnections', 'Resilient-Seated', 'Gate', 'Valves']
---

## General

01. DESCRIPTION
   1. This section includes materials, testing, and installation of manually-operated Resilient Wedge Gate Valves (RWGV’s).
02. REFERENCE STANDARDS
   1. The publications listed below form part of this specification to the extent referenced and are referred to in the text by the basic designation only. Reference shall be made to the latest edition of said standards unless otherwise called for. 
   1. AWWA C210 - Liquid Epoxy Coating Systems for the Interior and Exterior of Steel Water Pipelines 
2. AWWA C213 - Fusion-Bonded Epoxy Coating for the Interior and Exterior of Steel Water Pipelines 
3. AWWA C509 - Resilient-Seated Gate Valves for Water Supply Service 
4. AWWA C515 - Reduced-Wall, Resilient-Seated Gate Valves for Water Supply Service 
5. AWWA C550 - Protective Interior Coatings for Valves and Hydrants SSPC - Steel Structures Painting Council 
03. RELATED WORK SPECIFIED ELSEWHERE
   1. Standard Drawings
2. Standard Specifications 01000, 01045, 01200, 01310, 01330, 01505, 01510, 01570, 02140, 02222, 02223, 02511, 02528, 02578, 03000, 03480, 03482, 09902, 09910, and Division 15.
04. SERVICE APPLICATION
   1. RWGV’s shall be installed on potable and Urban Treated Run-Off water mains and appurtenances in accordance with the Approved Plans and the Standard Drawings. 
2. RWGV’s shall be used to isolate and depressurize pipeline segments for repairs, modifications, inspections or maintenance. 
3. In general, RWGV’s shall be used when valves are required on pipelines and appurtenances sized 4” through 12”. 
4. In case of insufficient depth of cover, the valves shall be installed horizontally with bevel gearing.
05. SUBMITTALS
   1. RWGV’s 12” and smaller shall be selected from the Approved Materials List. 
06. SIZING OF VALVES
   1. Valves shall be the same size as the line in which they are installed unless otherwise noted on the Approved Plans.
07. VALVE ENDS
   1. Valve ends shall be compatible with the piping system in which they are being installed in accordance with the Approved Plans or directed by the City Engineer. 
   1. Ductile-iron flanges shall be in accordance with Section 15056.
08. VALVE TESTING
   1. RWGV’s shall be hydrostatically tested and valve coatings shall be holiday detected prior to shipment to the field in accordance with the testing procedures per AWWA C509. Valves delivered to the site prior to successful hydrostatic testing and holiday detection shall be rejected.
09. DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING
   1. Valves shall be delivered and stored in accordance with AWWA C550. The port openings shall be covered with plastic, cardboard or wood while in transit and during storage in the field. These covers shall remain in place until valves are ready to be installed. Valves shall not be stored in contact with bare ground. Valves shall not be stacked.
10. POLYETHYLENE ENCASEMENT
   1. Polyethylene wrap shall be used for the buried installation of resilient wedge gate valves in accordance with Section 15000.
1. PART 2 MATERIALS
1. 2.01 RESILIENT WEDGE GATE VALVES (RWGV’s)
   1. RWGV’s shall be ductile-iron in accordance with AWWA C509 and C515 except as modified herein. 
2. RWGV’s shall have smooth unobstructed waterways free from any sediment pockets. 
3. RWGV’s shall be leak-tight at their rated pressure. 
   1. 4-12” Resilient Wedge Gate Valve - Ductile Iron Full Wall
1. The resilient seat gate valves shall fully comply with the latest revision of AWWA C509, and shall also be UL listed and FM approved. The valves shall be tested and certified to ANSI/NSF 61.
2. The valve shall have a 250 psig working pressure. Each valve shall be factory seat tested to 250psig and shell tested to 500psig.
3. The valve type shall be NRS (non-rising stem).
4. The valve shall have an arrow cast on the operating nut or hand-wheel showing opening direction. The direction of opening shall be as specified.
5. The NRS valves shall be provided with a 2” square operating nut. The bolt that attaches the operating nut to the stem shall be recessed into the operating nut so as not to interfere with valve wrench operation.
6. The valves shall have bolts and nuts for the stuffing box and bonnet with one of the following compositions:
		1. Type 316 stainless steel.
7. The valve stem shall be made of ASTM B98-C66100/H02 (Everdur) bar stock material (no cast stem material). The stem shall have at least one “anti-friction” thrust washer above and below the stem collar to reduce operating torque. The design of the NRS valve stem shall be such that if excessive input torque is applied, stem failure shall occur above the stuffing box at such a point as to enable the operation of the valve with a pipe wrench or other readily available tool. The stem material shall provide a minimum 70,000 psi tensile strength with 20% elongation and yield strength of 38,000 psi. Valves with two-piece stem collars are unacceptable.
8. The NRS valves shall have a stuffing box (with dirt seal) that is o-ring sealed. Two o-rings shall be placed above and one o-ring below the stem thrust collar. The thrust collar shall be factory lubricated. The thrust collar and its lubrication shall be isolated by the o-rings from the waterway and from outside contamination providing permanent lubrication for long term ease of operation. Valves without a stuffing box are unacceptable. Valves without at least three stem o-rings are also unacceptable.
9. The valve body and bonnet shall be composed of ASTM A536 ductile iron. The body and bonnet size shall also adhere to the minimum wall thickness table as set forth in AWWA C509. Wall thickness less than those are not acceptable.
   1. 3-12” Resilient Wedge Gate Valve - Ductile Iron Full Wall
1. The valve disc and guide lugs must be fully (100%) encapsulated in EPDM. The peel strength shall not be less than 75 pounds per inch (ASTM D429). Guide caps of an Acetal-bearing material shall be placed over solid guide lugs to prevent abrasion and to reduce the operating torque. Guide lugs place over bare metal are not acceptable. 
2. The valves shall have all internal and external ferrous surfaces coated with a fusion bonded thermosetting powder epoxy coating of 10 mils nominal thickness. The coating shall conform to AWWA C550.
3. The valves shall be warranted by the manufacturer against defects in materials or workmanship for a period of ten (10) years from the date of manufacture. The manufacturing facility for the valves must have current ISO certification.
   1. The NRS valves shall be per the Approved Materials List, or approved equal.
1. 2.02 VALVE CANS AND EXTENSION STEMS
   1. Valve cans and extension stems for buried valves shall be in accordance with Section 15000 and selected from the Approved Materials List, or approved equal.
1. 2.03 CONCRETE
   1. Concrete used for thrust, anchor, and support blocks shall be in accordance with Section 03000.
1. 2.04 POLYETHYLENE ENCASEMENT
   1. Polyethylene wrap shall be in accordance with Section 15000 and shall be selected from the Approved Materials List, or approved equal.
1. 

## Execution


	1. INSTALLATION
   1. Install valves with the bolt holes straddling the vertical centerline of pipe and the operating nut in the Vertical position unless otherwise noted on the Approved Plans.
2. Valves shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and the applicable section of these specifications for the piping material and joint type being used.
3. Joints shall be prepared for installation in accordance with Section 15056.
1. 3.02 POLYETHYLENE ENCASEMENT
   1. Install polyethylene wrap for all buried valves in accordance with Section 15000.
1. 3.03 CONCRETE
   1. Concrete thrust, anchor, and support blocks shall be installed in accordance with Section 03000 and the Standard Drawings. The concrete shall be placed so that valves and valve operators will be accessible for repairs or replacement. Prior to filling the pipeline with water, refer to Section 03000 for the minimum concrete curing time required.
1. 3.04 VALVE CANS AND EXTENSION STEMS
   1. Valve cans and extension stems for buried valves shall be installed in accordance with Section 15000 and the Standard Drawings.
1. 3.05 DISINFECTION OF VALVES
   1. Disinfection and flushing of valves shall be in accordance with Section 15041, as part of the process of disinfecting the main pipeline. Valves shall be operated during the disinfection period to completely disinfect all internal parts.
1. 3.06 HYDROSTATIC TESTING
   1. Valves shall be hydrostatically tested in conjunction with the pipeline in which they are installed in accordance with Section 15044.
1. 3.07 FIELD PAINTING AND COATING
   1. The exterior of valves installed above ground or exposed in vaults or enclosures shall be field painted in accordance with Section 09910.
   

