---
title: Signage
section: '1014002'
divNumb: 10
divName: Specialties
subgroup: Facility Construction
tags: ['Facility', 'Construction', 'Specialties', 'Signage']
navigation:
  key: Signage
  parent: Specialties
  order: 14002.0
---

   1. section 10 14 01
   1. signage

General

* 
	1. **Summary
   1. Work under this section shall include the installation of room identification signs. 
2. Related specification sections include:
	1. Section 10 14 00, Identification Devices
	2. **Quality Assurance
3. Work shall be per:
	1. Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA):
		1. Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG).
	2. ASTM International (ASTM):
		1.  B26, Standard Specification for Aluminum-Alloy Sand Castings.
	3. Building code:
		1.  International Code Council (ICC):
			1.  International Building Code and associated standards, 2015 Edition including all amendments, referred to herein as Building Code.
	4. **Submittals
4. See Specification Section 01 33 00 for requirements for the mechanics and administration of the submittal process.
5. Shop drawings shall include:
	1. Product technical data including acknowledgement that products submitted meet requirements of standards referenced and the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
6. Schedule of all signs indicating text and graphics. 
7. Layout drawings of all signage showing size, letter, style, text, border, finish and installation details.
8. Provide samples of room identification signs. 
   ## Product
1. 2.1 Materials
   1. Room Identification Signs:
	1. Interior:
		1. Dry, non-corrosive areas: Melamine plastic suitable for raised lettering and Braille. 
		2. Wet or corrosive areas: Aluminum or fiberglass suitable for raised lettering and Braille.
	2. Exterior:
		1. Aluminum or fiberglass suitable for raised lettering and Braille.
	3. **Fabrication
2. Room Identification Signs:
	
General
:
		1. Raised text, border and graphics.
			1. Minimum 1/32 IN height.
			2. Provide international graphic symbology for all toilet, locker and shower rooms or combinations thereof, and for unisex toilet rooms and stairs.
			3. Provide handicap symbol on all signs for rooms meeting handicap requirements.
		2. Grade 2 Braille.
		3. Finish: Eggshell.
			1. Color: To be selected.
		4. Text:
			1. Typeface: Sans Serif.
			2. Size: Minimum 3/4 IN high.
		5. Exterior signs shall be rated for exterior use.

Execution
1. 3.1 Installation
   1. Room Identification Signs:
	1. Install signs using foam tape for interior signs and stainless steel screws (minimum of two (2)) for exterior signs.
	2. Mounting Locations:
		1. Tactile characters on signs shall be located 48 IN minimum above the finished floor or ground surface, measured from the baseline of the lowest tactile character and 60 IN maximum above the finish floor or ground surface, measured from the baseline of the highest tactile character.
		2. Where a tactile sign is provided 1 at a door, the sign shall be located alongside the door at the latch side. Where a tactile sign is provided at double doors with one active leaf, the sign shall be located on the inactive leaf. Where a tactile sign is provided at double doors with two active leafs, the sign shall be located to the right side of the right hand door. Where there is no wall space at the latch side of a single door or at the right side of double doors, signs shall be located on the nearest adjacent wall.
		3. Signs containing tactile characters shall be located so that a clear floor space of 18 IN minimum by 18 IN minimum, centered on the tactile characters, is provided beyond the arc of any door swing between the closed position and 45 degree open position.
1. 3.2 Schedules
   1. Room Identification Signs:
         1. Room
1. Mounting
1. Remarks
   1. Filter Room
   1. Interior
   1. Mount adjacent to door
   1. Pump Room
   1. Interior
   1. Mount adjacent to door
   1. Chemical Storage Room
   1. Interior
   1. Mount adjacent to door
   1. Restroom
   1. Interior
   1. Mount adjacent to door

*[this page intentionally left blank]*

