---
title: Tiling
section: '093000'
divNumb: 9
divName: Finishes
subgroup: Facility Construction
tags: ['Facility', 'Construction', 'Finishes', 'Tiling']
navigation:
  key: Tiling
  parent: Finishes
  order: 3000.0
---


General
   1. SUMMARY
   1. Section Includes
   1. All labor, materials, equipment and services necessary to furnish and install all resilient flooring and related items as indicated or specified.
   1. Related Sections
   1. SUBMITTALS
   1. Submit samples of the following for approval:
      1. Resilient tile
   1. Base
   1. Nosings
   1. All submittals shall be prepared in accordance with Section 013300.
   1. DELIVERY, STORAGE AND PROTECTION
   1. Store all materials off the ground under watertight cover and away from sweating walls and other damp surfaces until ready for use.
   1. All rooms, subfloors, tiles and adhesives shall be maintained at a minimum temperature of 70 degrees F for at least 48 hours before commencing work.
   1. Temperature shall be maintained during installation and for at least 48 hours after completion.
   1. Remove damaged or deteriorated material from the premises.
   1. Protect finished work installed by other trades prior to work under this Section. Any work damaged by workers of this trade shall be replaced without cost to the Owner.
   1. MAINTENANCE
   1. Sweep daily with a soft broom, treated cloths, or treated mops which will remove dirt and dust build-up.
   1. Wash resilient floors every two weeks in light traffic areas and more often in areas that receive heavy spillage.
   1. This light duty cleaning does not require the removal of the polish finish.
   1. Alkaline cleaners should not be used because the residue may dull the glossy finish.
   1. Floor protectors are required to retain the beauty of resilient flooring.
   1. Flat composite cups shall be used under furniture legs to allow for a more even distribution of the weight.
   1. Furniture that is frequently moved shall be equipped with casters 2 inches in diameter with soft rubber treads at least 3/4 inch wide.
   1. Glides shall have a smooth, flat base with rounded edges and a flexible shank.
   1. The glides should be 1-1/4 to 2-1/2 inches in diameter.
   1. Protectors shall be cleaned each time the floor is washed to prevent scratch buildup.
   1. PRODUCTS
   1. MANUFACTURERS
   1. Armstrong Excelon
   1. Azrock
   1. Tarkett
   1. MATERIALS
   1. Vinyl Composition Tile
   1. 12"x12", 1/8" thick, or Vinyl Sheeting
   1. Colors, as selected, from standard patterns and colors
   1. Rubber Base
   1. Molded rubber cove base (top set)
   1. 4" high x 1/8" thick
   1. Colors, as selected, from full color range of manufacturer.
   1. Vinyl Base
   1. Vinyl cove base (top set)
   1. 4" high x 1/8" thick
   1. Colors, as selected, from full color range of manufacturer.
   1. Flooring Adhesives:
      1. As per flooring manufacturer's recommendations.
   1. Edging Strips
   1. 1/8" thick
   1. Vinyl or rubber
   1. Tapered or bullnose edge
   1. Color to match tile or as selected from manufacturer's colors.
   1. Base Adhesives:
      1. Underlayment
   1. Molded Rubber Stair Nosings
   1. 1/4" thick
   1. Square nose
   1. Color as selected
   1. Double lock type
   1. Nosing Adhesive:
      1. EXECUTION
   1. PREPARATION
   1. Inspect all surfaces to receive tile base and treads and report all defects that will affect the installation.
   1. Fill low areas with underlayment.
   1. Fill all joints, cracks and chips in sub-floor with a crack filler or underlayment as required to provide a true, even surface to receive cove base.
   1. Concrete surfaces to receive tile or base shall be dry, free of paint and oil, and swept clean before work commences.
   1. Contractor shall be held responsible for any defects in the sub-floor, which appear in the flooring surface after completion.
   1. INSTALLATION
   1. After preparation of surfaces, apply adhesive in a thin film and spread evenly with a serrated trowel with notches 1/16" x 1/16", 1/8" apart.
   1. Direction of graining shall be as directed.
   1. Lay out work so that, as far as practicable, no piece of tile shall be less than 5" wide, particularly at doors.
   1. All joints shall be tight, in true alignment, and as inconspicuous as possible.
   1. Where two colors meet at door openings or where tile terminates at doors to rooms having exposed concrete floors, provide a 1"-wide feature strip directly under the door.
   1. NREL shall have the option of selecting different colors in different areas or rooms.
   1. Cut and fit tile sufficiently close to walls, columns, etc., so that joint will be covered by the base, where installed.
   1. At other fixed surfaces, including thresholds, pipes, removable covers, floor outlets and permanent built-in cabinets and equipment, scribe and accurately fit tile as required.
   1. Provide tile inserts at removable floor outlet covers. Remove excess adhesive from all surfaces immediately.
   1. Seal joints at pipes with waterproof cement.
   1. Provide underlayment as required to bring resilient tile surface to the same level as abutting ceramic tile, or other flooring.
   1. Install rubber stair nosings per manufacturer's instructions.
   1. Base
   1. After preparation of wall surfaces, apply adhesive to back of base, leaving top 1/4" free of adhesive.
   1. Press base firmly against the walls sliding horizontally into place, making sure toe is tight to the floor and against the wall.
   1. Roll the entire surface of the base with a hand roller, and press the top of the base against the wall with a straightedge.
   1. Remove excess adhesive immediately.
   1. Install preformed corners at all outside corners.
   1. Cope at internal corners.
   1. Where base terminates at projections install end caps.
   1. CLEANING
   1. Clean floors by a method recommended by the manufacturer of the flooring.
   1. Wax the tile after the adhesive has had an opportunity to reach its final, firm set.
   1. This period of time shall be at least two days after laying the flooring in the summertime and at least five days after laying the flooring in the heated building of wintertime.
   1. Paste or liquid-solvent waxes, which contain solvents such as naphtha or turpentine, should not be used on resilient flooring.
   1. Resilient flooring shall never be treated with lacquers, varnishes, or similar finishes due to discoloring and be difficulty in removing.
   1. After the cleaning and waxing operation, polish the floor with an electric polisher to a smooth, even and highly reflective finish.
   1. Protect the flooring with heavy paper until acceptance of the work.
1. END OF SECTION

