---
title: Resilient Sheet Flooring
section: '096516'
divNumb: 9
divName: Finishes
subgroup: Facility Construction
tags: ['Facility', 'Construction', 'Finishes', 'Resilient', 'Sheet', 'Flooring']
navigation:
  key: Resilient Sheet Flooring
  parent: Finishes
  order: 6516.0
---


General
   1. DESCRIPTION
   1. Grades of resilient sheet vinyl floor covering without backing having vinyl plastic wear layer with backing.
   1. Installation of sheet flooring including following:
      1. Heat welded seams.
   1. Integral cove base:
      1. Installed at intersection of floor and vertical surfaces.
   1. QUALITY CONTROL-Qualifications:
      1. NREL shall approve products or service of proposed manufacturer, suppliers, and installers, and the Contractor shall submit certification that:
            1. Heat welded seaming is manufacturer's prescribed method of installation.
   1. Installer is approved by manufacturer of materials and has technical qualifications, experience, trained personnel, and facilities to install specified items.
   1. Manufacturer's product submitted has been in satisfactory operation, on three installations similar and equivalent in size to this project for three years. Submit list of installations.
   1. The sheet vinyl floor coverings shall meet fire performance characteristics as determined by testing products, per ASTM test method, indicated below by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. (UL) or another recognized testing and inspecting agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction.
   1. Critical Radiant Flux:
      1. 0.45 watts per sq. cm or more, Class I, per ASTM E648.
   1. Smoke Density:
      1. Less than 450 per ASTM E662.
   1. The floor covering manufacturer shall certify that products supplied for installation comply with local regulations controlling use of volatile organic compounds (VOC’s).
   1. SUBMITTALS
   1. In accordance with Section 013300, Submittals and Shop Drawings, submit following:
      1. Manufacturer's Literature and Data:
            1. Description of resilient material and accessories to be provided.
   1. Resilient material manufacturer's recommendations for adhesives, weld rods, sealants, and underlayment.
   1. Application and installation instructions.
   1. Samples:
      1. Sheet material, 38 mm by 300 mm (1-1/2 inch by 12 inch), of each color and pattern with a welded seam using proposed welding rod.
   1. Cap strip and fillet strip, 300 mm (12 inches) for integral base.
   1. Shop Drawings and Certificates:
      1. Layout of joints showing patterns where joints are expressed, and type and location of obscure type joints. Indicate orientation of directional patterns.
   1. PROJECT CONDITIONS
   1. Maintain temperature of floor materials and room, where work occurs, above 18 ° C (65 °F) and below 38 °C (100 °F) for 48 hours before, during and for 48 hours after installation. After above period, room temperature shall not fall below 13 °C (55 °F).
   1. Construction in or near areas to receive flooring work shall be complete, dry and cured. Do not install resilient flooring over slabs until they have been cured and are sufficiently dry to achieve a bond with adhesive. Follow flooring manufacturers recommendations for bond and moisture testing.
   1. Building shall be permanently enclosed. Schedule construction so that floor receives no construction traffic when completed.
   1. DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING
   1. Deliver materials to site in original sealed packages or containers; labeled for identification with manufacturer's name and brand.
   1. Store materials in weathertight and dry storage facility. Protect from damage due to handling, weather, and construction operations before, during and after installation. Store sheet flooring on end with ambient temperatures maintained as recommended by manufacturer.
   1. Move sheet vinyl floor coverings and installation accessories into spaces where they will be installed at least 48 hours in advance of installation.
   1. APPLICABLE PUBLICATIONS
   1. Publications listed below form a part of this specification to extent referenced. Publications are referenced in text by basic designation only.
   1. American Society For Testing Materials (ASTM):
      1. E648 Critical Radiant Flux of Floor-Covering Systems Using a Radiant Energy Source.
   1. E662 Specific Optical Density of Smoke Generated by Solid Materials.
   1. F710 Practice for Preparing Concrete Floors and Other Monolithic Floors to Receive Resilient Flooring.
   1. F1303 Sheet Vinyl Floor Covering with Backing.
   1. F1913 Sheet Vinyl Flooring without Backing
   1. Resilient Floor Covering Institute (RFCI):
      1. RFCI MRP Addressing Moisture Related Problems Relevant to Resilient Floor Coverings Installed Over Concrete.
   1. RFCI-WP Recommended Work Practices for Removal of Resilient Floor Coverings.
   1. SCHEDULING
   1. Interior finish work such as drywall finishing, ceiling work, and painting work shall be complete and dry before installation.
   1. Mechanical, electrical, and other work above ceiling line shall be completed. Heating, ventilating, and air conditioning systems shall be installed and operating in order to maintain temperature and humidity requirements.
   1. GUARANTY:
      1. Submit written guaranty, in accordance with General Condition requirements except that guarantee period shall be extended to include two (2) years.
   1. PRODUCTS
   1. SHEET VINYL FLOOR COVERINGS
   1. Sheet Vinyl Floor Coverings:
      1. Smooth face, minimum thickness nominal
   1. 2 mm (0.08 inch). Sheet flooring shall conform to ASTM F1913 and material requirements specified in ASTM F1303, Type II, Grade 1, backing classification not applicable. Foam backed sheet flooring is not acceptable.
   1. Size:
      1. Provide maximum size sheet vinyl material produced by manufacturer to provide minimum number of joints. Minimum size width acceptable - 1200 mm (48 inches).
   1. Each color and pattern of sheet flooring shall be of same production run.
   1. WELDING ROD:
      1. Product of floor covering manufacturer in color shall match field color of sheet vinyl covering.
   1. APPLICATION MATERIALS AND ACCESSORIES
   1. Floor and Base Adhesive:
      1. Type recommended by sheet flooring material manufacturer for conditions of use.
   1. Mastic Underlayment (for concrete floors):
      1. Provide products with latex or polyvinyl acetate resins in mix. Condition to be corrected shall determine type of underlayment selected for use.
   1. Base Accessories:
      1. Fillet Strip:
         1. 19 mm (3/4 inch) radius fillet strip compatible with resilient sheet material.
   1. Cap Strip:
      1. Extruded flanged zero edge vinyl reducer strip approximately 25 mm (one inch) exposed height with 13 mm (1/2 inch) flange.
   1. EXECUTION
   1. SUBFLOOR PREPARATION
   1. Concrete Subfloors:
      1. Verify that concrete slabs comply with ASTM F710.
   1. Installer shall examine surfaces on which resilient sheet flooring is to be installed, and shall advise Contractor, in writing, of areas which are unacceptable for installation of flooring material. Installer shall advise Contractor which methods are to be used to correct conditions that will impair proper installation. Installation shall not proceed until unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected.
   1. Slab substrates dry, free of curing compounds, sealers, hardeners, and other materials which would interfere with bonding of adhesive. Determine adhesion and dryness characteristics by performing bond and moisture tests recommended by Resilient Floor Covering Institute recommendations in manual RFCI-MRP.
   1. Broom or vacuum clean substrates to be covered by sheet vinyl floor coverings immediately before installation. Following cleaning, examine substrates to determine if there is visually any evidence of moisture, alkaline salts, carbonation, or dust.
   1. Primer:
      1. If recommended by flooring manufacturer, prior to application of adhesive, apply concrete slab primer in accordance with manufacturer’s directions.
   1. INSTALLATION OF FLOORING
   1. Install work in strict compliance with manufacturer's instructions and approved layout drawings.
   1. Maintain uniformity of sheet vinyl floor covering direction and avoid cross seams.
   1. Arrange for a minimum number of seams and place them in inconspicuous and low traffic areas, but in no case less than 150 mm (6 inches) away from parallel joints in flooring substrates.
   1. Match edges of resilient floor coverings for color shading and pattern at seams.
   1. Where resilient sheet flooring abuts other flooring material floors shall finish level.
   1. Extend sheet vinyl floor coverings into toe spaces, door reveals, closets, and similar openings.
   1. INSTALLATION OF INTEGRAL COVED BASE
   1. Set preformed cove to receive base. Install base material with adhesive and terminate exposed edge with cap strip. Integral base shall be 150 mm (6 inches) high.
   1. Internal and external corners shall be formed to geometric shape generated by cove at either square or radius corners.
   1. WELDING
   1. Heat weld all joints of flooring and base using equipment and procedures recommended by flooring manufacturer.
   1. Welding shall consist of routing joint, inserting a welding rod into routed space, and terminally fusing into a homogeneous joint.
   1. Upon completion of welding, surface across joint shall finish flush, free from voids, and recessed or raised areas.
   1. Fusion of Material:
      1. Joint shall be fused a minimum of 65 percent through thickness of material, and after welding shall meet specified characteristics for flooring.
   1. CLEANING
   1. Remove visible adhesive and other surface blemishes using methods and cleaner recommended by floor covering manufacturers.
   1. Vacuum floor thoroughly.
   1. Do not wash floor until after period recommended by floor covering manufacturer and then prepare in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations.
   1. Upon completion, Resident Engineer shall inspect floor and base to ascertain that work was done in accordance with manufacturer's printed instructions.
   1. Perform initial maintenance according to flooring manufacturer’s written recommendations.
   1. PROTECTION:
      1. Protect installed flooring as recommended by flooring manufacturer against damage from rolling loads, other trades, or placement of fixtures and furnishings.
1. END OF SECTION

