---
title: Construction Surveying
section: '017123.162'
divNumb: 1
divName: General Requirements
subgroup: General Requirements
tags: ['General', 'Requirements', 'Construction', 'Surveying']
---

## General

1. SCOPE
   1. This section includes the furnishing of all labor, materials, equipment and services necessary for the completion of Construction Survey Work in accordance with the Contract Documents.
   1. This Work includes the layout of all lines and grades shown on the Drawings from baselines that have already been established by the ENGINEER.
2. PROTECTION OF SURVEY MARKERS
   1. CONTRACTOR shall notify the OWNER not less than three working days prior to starting work in order that the OWNER may take necessary measures to ensure the preservation of survey monuments, stakes, lot stakes, and benchmarks. Contactor shall not disturb permanent survey monuments, stakes, lot stakes, or benchmarks without the consent of the OWNER, and notify the OWNER and bear the expense of replacing any that may be disturbed without permission. Replacement shall be done by OWNER with all costs charged against, and shall be deducted from, payment for CONTRACTOR work.
3. When a change is made in the finished elevation of the pavement of any roadway in which a permanent survey monument is located, CONTRACTOR shall adjust the monument cover to the new grade at no expense to the Owner.
4. CONTRACTOR shall preserve construction survey stakes and marks for the duration of their usefulness during construction. If any construction survey stakes are lost or disturbed through negligence of CONTRACTOR, and in the judgment of the OWNER need to be replaced, such replacement shall be by the OWNER at the expense of the CONTRACTOR. The cost of replacement shall be charged against, and shall be deducted from, payments for CONTRACTOR work.
5. All work, upon completion, shall conform to the lines, elevations and grades shown on the plans.

## Product

1. SURVEY EQUIPMENT
   1. CONTRACTOR's surveying equipment shall be able to operate within the tolerance limits set by the technical specifications. The OWNER may at any time during the project require CONTRACTOR's equipment to be checked for accuracy

## Execution

1. General
   1. The ENGINEER has established baselines and benchmarks, as shown on the Drawings, which in his judgment enables the CONTRACTOR to proceed with the Work.
2. The CONTRACTOR shall provide field forces necessary to lay location, alignment, elevation and grade of the Work shown on the Drawings or as altered or modified by the ENGINEER.
3. The CONTRACTOR shall use competent personnel and suitable equipment for the layout of the work required. The CONTRACTOR shall employ a Registered ENGINEER or Registered Surveyor to supervise the layout work if required by the Contract Documents or if the nature of the work requires professional assistance.

   1. RIGHT-OF-WAYS AND EASEMENTS
   1. When the CONTRACTOR performs construction within ten (10) feet of a right-of-way or easement line, he/she shall place tall stakes properly identified at points of change in width or direction of the right-of-way or easement line and at points along the line so that at least two stakes can be seen distinctly from any point on the line.

   1. STRUCTURES AND FINISH GRADES
   1. Stakes for line and grade of structures and finish grades shall be set in sufficient number to assure conformance to plan line and grade.

4. PART 4 – SPECIAL PROVISIONS
5. MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
   1. When not listed in the proposal, all “CONTRUCTION SURVEY WORK” costs will be considered incidental work for which no separate payment will be made.
