---
title: Riprap
section: '3137002'
divNumb: 31
divName: Earthwork
subgroup: Site and Infrastructure
tags: ['Site', 'Infrastructure', 'Earthwork', 'Riprap']
navigation:
  key: Riprap
  parent: Earthwork
  order: 37002.0
---

   1. SECTION 2261
1. RIPRAP

General
   1. WORK INCLUDED:
      1. The work under this section shall include the foundation preparation for riprap, riprap material requirements and the placing of the rock riprap in the areas noted on the Drawings or directed by the Project Engineer.
   1. RELATED DOCUMENTS:
      1. The General Contract Conditions, Drawings and other Division - 1 Specification sections apply to Work of this section.
   1. RELATED WORK:
      1. Geotextiles, Section 2242
   1. SUBMITTALS
   1. The Project Engineer shall approve the riprap source prior to transporting and placing riprap at its point of use.
   1. PRODUCTS
   1. MATERIALS:
      1. The riprap shall be durable and of suitable quality to assure permanence in the climate in which it is to be used. The stone shall be sound and dense, free from cracks, seams and other defects that would tend to increase deterioration from weathering. The stone shall be clean and free from organic matter. The stone shall be angular with fractured faces, nearly rectangular in shape with a breadth or thickness at least 1/3 its length. Thin slab-type stones and flaking rock shall not be used. The stone shall have a specific gravity of at least 2.50. The gradation of the riprap is dependent on the stone size as shown on the Drawings. If no stone size is shown on the Drawings, the stone size shall be 12 inches. The stone size designated shall be equal to d50. The stone shall have one of the gradations specified in the following table.
   1. d50 (inches)

% Smaller than Given Size by Weight
   1. Intermediate Rock Dimension (inches)
   1. 6
   1. 70-100
   1. 12
   1. 50-70
   1. 9
   1. 35-50
   1. 6
   1. 2-10
   1. 2
   1. 9
   1. 70-100
   1. 15
   1. 50-70
   1. 12
   1. 35-50
   1. 9
   1. 2-10
   1. 3
   1. 12
   1. 70-100
   1. 21
   1. 50-70
   1. 18
   1. 35-50
   1. 12
   1. 2-10
   1. 4
   1. 18
   1. 70-100
   1. 30
   1. 50-70
   1. 24
   1. 35-50
   1. 18
   1. 2-10
   1. 6
   1. 24
   1. 70-100
   1. 42
   1. 50-70
   1. 33
   1. 35-50
   1. 24
   1. 2-10
   1. 9
   1. ALTERNATE MATERIALS:
      1. If local rock is not available that is angular with fractured faces, nearly rectangular in shape with a breadth or thickness at least 1/3 its length, as required in 2.1, rounded river rock may be used with specific approval of the Project Engineer. The use of river rock may require that channel side slopes be flattened, and in all cases, the required gradation shall be increased by at least 25%.
   1. EXECUTION
   1. PREPARATION:
      1. Earth surfaces on which the rock riprap is to be placed shall be trimmed and graded to conform to the lines or sections shown on the Drawings. Surfaces which are below grade shall be brought to grade by filling with well-compacted materials similar to the adjacent materials.
   1. INSTALLATION:
      1. Dumped riprap composed of stone meeting the requirements of this Specification shall be placed by equipment on the surfaces and to the depths indicated on the Drawings or as staked on the ground. The riprap shall be placed to the full course thickness in one operation and in such a manner as to avoid displacement of the underlying materials. The riprap shall be delivered and spread so that the mass of stone in place shall be well-graded with the larger rocks uniformly distributed and the smaller rocks and spalls filling the voids between the larger rocks. The finished riprap shall be free from concentrations of small and large stones. Placing riprap by means likely to cause segregation of the various sizes will not be permitted. Hand placing or rearranging of individual stone by mechanical equipment may be required to the extent necessary to secure the results specified above. The finished surface of the riprap shall be slightly below the adjacent ground surface and shall slope toward the center of the riprap installation. Riprap placed at bridge abutments, wingwalls and at stream channels shall be keyed into the existing slope along the upstream edge. The key shall have dimensions equal to 2 “T” deep by 2 “T” wide, where “T” equals the designated mat thickness.4
1. END of SECTION

