---
title: Geotextiles for Exterior Improvements()
section: '320519.131'
divNumb: 32
divName: Exterior Improvements
subgroup: Site and Infrastructure
tags: ['Site', 'Infrastructure', 'Exterior', 'Improvements', 'Geotextiles', 'for', 'Improvements()']
---

      1. SECTION 2242
1. GEOTEXTILES

General
   1. RELATED DOCUMENTS:
      1. The General Contract Conditions, Drawings and other Division - 1 Specification sections apply to Work of this section.
   1. DESCRIPTION:
      1. Work Included:
      1. Provide all fabric, complete in place, as shown on the Drawings or directed by the Project Engineer.
   1. PRODUCTS
   1. MATERIALS
   1. Drainage:
      1. Fabric for use in subsurface drainage applications and building foundations where high permeability is of importance shall be MIRAFI 140N, a surface conforming, non-woven polypropylene fabric as manufactured by MIRAFI, Inc.
   1. Riprap:
      1. The fabric required beneath riprap shall be according to the following applications or as specifically noted on the Drawings.
   1. Application 1:
      1. Where soil retention and free passage of water are of primary importance, and where the fabric is to be covered with a minimum of 3 inches of select fine material prior to placement of riprap, the fabric shall be MIRAFI 140N as in 2.1 A. above.
   1. Where increased strength may be necessary, or when a covering of select fines is not specified prior to riprap placement, the fabric shall be MIRAFI 600X as manufactured by MIRAFI, Inc.
   1. Stabilization:
      1. Fabric for use in ground stabilization situations where separation, confinement and load distribution are of primary importance shall be MIRAFI 500X or 600X, a surface conforming woven polypropylene fabric as manufactured by MIRAFI, Inc. MIRAFI 600X shall be used where higher than normal installation stresses are anticipated such as in bog or very wet areas.
   1. Pavement Reinforcement:
      1. Fabric for use as asphaltic pavement reinforcement shall be a 100 percent needle punched non-woven polypropylene such as PETROMAT, Paving Grade, as manufactured by Phillips Fibers Corporation.
   1. Crusher Fines Trails:
      1. Fabric for use under crusher fines or other soft surface trails shall be MIRAFI 140 S weed Suppression fabric or approved equal. If paving shall support routine vehicular traffic a geogrid shall be used. Use Tensar BX1200 or approved equal per manufacturers recommendations.
   1. Concrete Unit Pavers:
      1. Fabric for use under pavers shall be Mirafi 500X Interlocking Concrete Paver Stabilization Geotextile, by Mirafi, 888.795.0808 or approved equal.
   1. EXECUTION
   1. PREPARATION:
      1. The surface upon which the fabric is to be placed shall in general be free from trees, stumps, large rocks and other protruding objects which could damage the fabric. Areas on which geotextile fabric is to be placed shall have uniform slope, be reasonably free from mounds and windows, and free of any debris or projections, which could damage the material. The Project Engineer will determine the appropriate degree of preparation required prior to fabric placement.
1. INSTALLATION:** Installation of all fabric shall be per the manufacturer’s written recommendations and as directed by the Project Engineer. In riprap applications the Project Engineer shall inspect and approve the placement of select fine materials on top of fabric prior to the Contractor commencing final placement of riprap. For soft surface trails, install fabric between the compacted subgrade and crushed aggregate screenings across the entire width of trail to receive aggregate in addition to twelve inches (12”) past the edges. Overlap ends of rolls a minimum of eighteen inches (18”).
1. END OF SECTION

