---
title: Sodding
section: '3292232'
divNumb: 32
divName: Exterior Improvements
subgroup: Site and Infrastructure
tags: ['Site', 'Infrastructure', 'Exterior', 'Improvements', 'Sodding']
---

   1. SECTION 329223
   1. SODDING

## General

   1. SUMMARY
   1. Furnish all supervision, labor, material, equipment, transportation, permits and fees, and perform all operations in connection with the installation of sod, where called for in plans and specifications.
   1. REFERENCES
   1. Reference Standards:
      1. U.S. Department of Agriculture Rules and Regulations under Federal Seed Act and equal in quality to standards for Certified Seed.

## General

 Landscape Section
   1. Fine Grading and Soil Preparation Section
   1. SUBMITTALS
   1. Refer to General Landscape Section.
   1. QUALITY ASSURANCE
   1. Sod Materials
   1. Subject to inspection and acceptance. Owner’s representative reserves the right to reject at any time or place prior to acceptance, any work and sod which in the Owner’s representative's opinion fails to meet these specification requirements. Promptly remove rejected sod from site.
   1. Inspection
   1. Primarily for quality; however, other requirements are not waived even though visual inspection results in acceptance. Notify Owner’s representative of intended sod farm prior to cutting for inspection. Inspection at growth site shall not preclude the right of rejection at project site.
   1. Inspection will be made periodically during sodding, at completion and at end of warranty period by Owner’s representative.
   1. Inspection shall be scheduled prior to sodding. Owner’s representative will inspect finish grades on which sod will be laid. This inspection does not dismiss the contractor’s responsibility for creating positive drainage across the landscaped areas.
   1. Sod Standards

## General

  1. Healthy, thick turf having undergone a program of regular fertilization, mowing and weed control; free of objectionable weeds; uniform in green color, leaf texture and density; healthy, vigorous root system; inspected and found free of disease, nematodes, pests and pest larvae by the entomologist of the State Department of Agriculture.
   1. Each piece of Sod - Sandy-loam soil base that will not break, crumble or tear during sod installation.
   1. Thickness – 5/8" minimum root zone thickness.
   1. Thatch - Not to exceed ½" uncompressed.
   1. Size - Cut in strips 18" wide no more than 24 hours prior to delivery.
   1. DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING
   1. Packing and Shipping
   1. Deliver on sod on pallets properly loaded on vehicles and with root system protected from exposure to sun, wind, and heat in accordance with standard practice and labeled with botanical and common name of each grass species in accordance with Federal Seed Act.
   1. Protect sod from dehydration, contamination and heating at all times. Keep stored sod moist and under shade or covered with moistened burlap.
   1. Do not drop sod rolls from carts, trucks or pallets.
   1. Acceptance at Site
   1. Material shall be inspected upon arrival at job site.
   1. Immediately remove unacceptable material from job site.
   1. Storage and Protection
   1. Do not stack sod more than 2 feet deep.
   1. Do not deliver more sod than can be installed within 24 hours. Storage is not recommended.
   1. PROJECT/SITE CONDITIONS
   1. Environmental Requirements:
      1. Do not install sod on saturated or frozen soil unless otherwise directed by owner’s representative.
   1. Existing Conditions
   1. Import and place any fill material required to adjust the fine grade to meet drainage requirements or to match hard surface fine grades, or as indicated on plans (e.g., 1 inch lower than adjacent concrete trails).
   1. Vehicular accessibility on site shall be as directed by Owner’s representative. Repair damage to prepared grounds and surfaces caused by vehicular movement during work under this section to original condition at no additional cost to Owner.
   1. WARRANTY
   1. Warranty sod for a period of one year from date of Substantial Completion be in a healthy, vigorous growing condition.
   1. During the original warranty period, replace at once sod areas that die due to natural causes, etc., or which in Owner’s representative's opinions are unhealthy.
   1. Replacement will not be required in any season definitely unfavorable for sodding.
   1. Install replacements as originally specified and warranted.
   1. Maintenance
   1. The maintenance shall begin immediately after each area is sodded and continue until final acceptance of entire project. During this time, the contractor shall, be responsible for watering, mowing, spraying, weeding, aerating, fertilizing, and all related work as necessary to ensure that sodded areas are in a vigorous growing condition. Furnish all supervision, labor, material and equipment to maintain turf areas.
   1. Watering
   1. Initially water sod upon completion of convenient work areas until installation is complete and the irrigation system can be operated under full control. Water sod sufficiently to moisten subsoil at least 4" deep in a manner not to cause erosion or damage to adjacent finished surfaces. Water shall be free of substances harmful to plant growth. Be responsible for furnishing water from underground sprinkler system, quick couplers or other source.
   1. Contractor shall know, understand, and abide by all local water restrictions, if in effect.
   1. Contractor will be held responsible for any fines received for violating any watering restrictions in effect.
   1. The contractor shall attempt to provide the minimum water necessary to maintain irrigated landscape areas, especially in times of drought and during summer months. The owner or owner’s representative will determine what appropriate level of distress is acceptable on turf areas.
   1. Re-sodding
   1. Re-sod spots larger than nine inches square and not having healthy, uniform stand of grass.
   1. Insect and Disease Control:
      1. As required, using insecticides and fungicides approved by Owner or Owner’s Representative.
   1. PRODUCTS
   1. Refer to the General Landscape Section.
   1. EXECUTION
   1. EXAMINATION

## General

   1. Verify that existing site conditions are as specified and indicated before beginning work under this section.
   1. Layout
   1. Verify layout of sodded areas as indicated prior to starting operations.
   1. Grades
   1. The owner’s representative must inspect finished grades prior to installing any sod.
   1. Unsatisfactory Conditions
   1. Report in writing to General Contractor with copy to Owner’s representative.
   1. Beginning of installation means acceptance of existing conditions by this Contractor.
   1. PREPARATION
   1. Protection
   1. Pay for repairs made by contractors designated by Owner.
   1. Identify prepared sod areas requiring protection and erect barriers for proper protection and traffic control.
   1. Sodding Areas
   1. Remove weeds, debris and rocks larger than ½" which may hinder sodding. Dispose of accumulated debris off-site in approved legal dump site, or in a location pre-approved by the owner or owner’s representative.
   1. Repair
   1. Re-establish grade and specified conditions to damaged sod areas prior to placing sod.
   1. Adjustment
   1. Adjust irrigation heads to proper watering height according to depth of sod material but lower than compacted blade height to enable lawn mowers to cut grass freely without damage to the sprinkler system.
   1. Weeding
   1. If the area to be developed is infested with noxious or invasive weeds, a chemical application will be required, at a rate recommended on the chemical’s product label.
   1. Fine Grading
   1. Perform as required to maintain positive drainage, prevent ponding and direct run-off into catch basins, drainage structures, etc., and as required to provide smooth well-contoured surface prior to proceeding. Tolerance:
      1. ± 0.04 foot.
   1. Unless noted on plans, tree lawns, or areas between curb and sidewalk, shall exhibit positive drainage towards the street. “Crowning”, berming, or anything other than straight grading between these surfaces shall be rejected, unless otherwise waived by owner or owner’s representative.
   1. Fine grading must be approved by both contractor and owner’s representative prior to sodding. Contractor should provide at least two (2) calendar days notice for inspection. Sod shall be installed with in 48 hours of inspection. The contractor will be responsible for repairing any grades damage by inclement weather, before or after finish grades are inspected.
   1. SODDING
   1. Sodding
   1. Soil on which sod is laid should be slightly moist.
   1. Lay with longest dimension parallel to contours and in continuous rows.
   1. Tightly butt ends and sides of sod together. Stagger and compact vertical joints between sod strips by rolling so sod will be incorporated with the ground surface, insuring tight joints between adjacent pieces.
   1. Where new sod meets existing, cut existing with sod cutter to insure a tight joint and smooth transition between new and existing turf cover.
   1. Rolling
   1. When soil and sod are moist, roll sod lightly as soon as possible after it is laid. Delay rolling until just before the second watering.
   1. Topsoil 
   1. Add along exposed edges to match adjacent grade. Feather topsoil out approximately 1 ft. from edge of sod.
   1. Drainage
   1. Assure finished areas of sod are such that positive drainage of storm and irrigation water will occur and ponding of water does not occur.
   1. REPAIR OF EXISTING SOD AREAS DISTURBED BY RENOVATION
   1. Repair existing sod areas disturbed by renovation work (utilities, paving, etc)., in accordance with these specifications to satisfaction of Owner.
   1. Add topsoil and re-sod as necessary to eliminate tire ruts and other depressions.
   1. NOTIFICATION OF INSPECTION
   1. Notification
   1. Give notice requesting inspection by Owner’s representative at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the anticipated date of completion. All sod must be healthy and significantly rooted in place in order to be considered complete.
   1. Deficiencies
   1. If deficiencies exist, Owner’s representative shall specify such deficiencies to the Contractor who shall make satisfactory adjustments and will again notify the Owner’s representative for final inspection.
   1. CLEANING
   1. Remove pallets, unused sod, and other debris from site. Clean paved and finished surfaces soiled as a result of work under this Section in accordance with directions given by Owner’s representative. Clean out drainage inlet structures.
   1. PROTECTION
   1. Provide and install barriers as required and as directed by Owner’s representative, or as needed, to protect sodded areas against damage form pedestrian and vehicular traffic until acceptance by Owner. Contractor is responsible for malicious destruction of sodding caused by others until substantial completion.
   1. END OF SECTION

