---
title: Price and Payment Procedures
section: '012000'
divNumb: 1
divName: General Requirements
subgroup: General Requirements
tags: ['General', 'Requirements', 'Price', 'Payment', 'Procedures']
---

   1. SECTION 01 20 00
1. PRICE AND PAYMENT PROCEDURES
1. 
## General

01. DESCRIPTION
   1. This Section includes specifications for measurement and payment as they apply to the Work, and includes provisions applicable to lump sum prices, unit prices, and allowances, as indicated.
   1. Measurement methods specified in the individual Sections of these Specifications shall govern if they differ from methods specified in this Section.
02. LUMP-SUM MEASUREMENT
   1. Lump-sum measurement will be for the entire item, unit of work, structure, or combination thereof, as specified and as indicated in the Bid Schedule of the Bid Form. 
1. If the Contractor requests progress payments for lump-sum items or amounts in the Bid Schedule, such progress payments will be made in accordance with a well-balanced, detailed program of payment-apportioning, prepared by the Contractor and submitted to the City Engineer for approval. Such payment-apportioning may require modifications during the Contract, as determined by the City Engineer. 
2. Such program for each applicable lump-sum item shall show fixed definable and measurable quantities where possible and unit prices there for as developed and assigned by the Contractor to the different features of the work and major subdivisions thereof. The summation of extensions of quantities and unit prices and related costs shall equal the amount of the lump-sum Contract Price or lump sum bid item indicated in the Bid Schedule. 
3. Following the City Engineer’s approval, progress payments will be made in accordance with the Contractor’s payment-apportioning program and from the approved progress schedule, reflecting the progress which occurred during the payment period as approved by the City Engineer.
03. MEASUREMENT OF QUANTITIES FOR UNIT PRICES
   1. Measurement Standards:
      1. All work to be paid for at a Contract price per unit measurement, as indicated in the Bid Schedule, will be measured by the City Engineer in accordance with United States Standard Measures.
2. A ton shall consist of 2,000 pounds avoirdupois.
   1. Measurement by Weight:
      1. Reinforcing steel, steel shapes, castings, miscellaneous metal, metal fabrications, and similar items to be paid for by weight shall be measured by scale or by handbook weights for the type and quantity of material actually furnished and used.
2. Unless shipped by rail, material to be measured and paid for by weight shall be weighed on sealed scales regularly inspected by the State Division of Measurement Standards or its designated representative, furnished by and at the expense of the Contractor. All weighing, measuring, and metering devices shall be suitable for the purpose intended and shall conform to the tolerances and specifications as outlined in the California Code of Regulations, Title 4, Chapter 9, and Division 5. 
3. Provide or utilize platform scales of sufficient size and capacity to permit the entire vehicle or combination of vehicles to rest on the scale platform while being weighed. Combination vehicles may be weighed as separate units provided they are disconnected while being weighed. Scales shall be inspected and certified as often as the City Engineer may deem necessary to ascertain accuracy. Costs incurred as a result of regulating, adjusting, testing, inspecting, and certifying scales shall be borne by the Contractor. 
4. A licensed weigh master shall weigh all materials weighed on scales furnished by the Contractor. The City Engineer may be present to witness the weighing and to check and compile the daily record of such scale weights. However, in any case, the City Engineer will require that the Contractor furnish weight slips and daily summary weigh sheets. In such cases, furnish a duplicate weight slip or a load slip for each vehicle weighed and deliver the slip to the City Engineer at the point of delivery of the material. 
5. If the material is shipped by rail, the certified car weights will be accepted, provided that only actual weight of material will be paid for and not minimum car weights used for assessing freight tariff. Car weights will not be acceptable for material to be passed through mixing plants. Material to be measured by weight shall be weighed separately for each bid item under which it is to be paid. 
6. Trucks used to haul material being paid for by weight shall be weighed empty daily and at such additional times as the City Engineer may require. Each truck shall bear a plainly legible identification mark. The City Engineer may require the weight of the material verified by weighing empty and loaded trucks on such other scales as the City Engineer may designate.
   1. Measurement by Volume:
      1. Measurement by volume will be by the cubic dimension indicated in the Bid Schedule. Method of volume measurement will be by the unit volume in place or removed as shown on the Contract Drawings or as specified. 
2. When material is to be measured and paid for on a volume basis and it is impractical to determine the volume by the specified method of measurement, or when requested by the Contractor in writing and accepted by the City Engineer in writing, the material may be weighed in accordance with the requirements specified for weight measurement. Such weights will be converted to volume measurement for payment purposes. Factors for conversion from weight measurement to volume measurement will be determined by the City Engineer and shall be agreed to by the Contractor before such method of measurement of pay quantities will be accepted. 
   1. Measurement by Area:
      1. Measurement by area will be by the square dimension shown on the Contract Drawings or as specified. Method of square measurement will be as specified.
   1. Linear Measurement:
      1. Linear measurement will be by the linear dimension listed or indicated in the Bid Schedule. Unless otherwise indicated, items, components, or work to be measured on a linear basis will be measured at the centerline of the item in place.
   1. Field Measurement for Payment:
      1. The City Engineer will compute all quantities of work performed by the Contractor on a unit-price basis, for payment purposes. 
2. The Contractor shall assist the City Engineer in the taking of measurements by providing all equipment, workers, and survey crews as required to measure quantities. Unless otherwise specified, all quantities shall be calculated using dimensions shown on the Contract Drawings. No allowance will be made for specified tolerances. 
04. VALUES OF UNIT PRICES
   1. The number of units and quantities contained in the Bid Schedule as estimated quantities are approximate only, and final payment will be made for the actual number of units and quantities which are incorporated in the Work and required by the Contract, as measured by the City Engineer.
   1. In the event that work or materials or equipment are required to be furnished to a greater or lesser extent than is indicated in the Contract Documents, such work or materials or equipment shall be furnished in greater or lesser quantities.
05. ALLOWANCES
   1. Description:
      1. Allowances specified in the Contract Documents and indicated in the Bid Schedule shall cause the work so covered to be furnished, performed, and completed for such sums as are acceptable to the City Engineer and shall include the cost to the Contractor of all materials and equipment to be delivered and installed under the specified Allowances.
   1. Specific Allowances:
      1. Specific Allowances, if any, included in the Contract are specified in Contract Specifications Section 01200, Price and Payment Procedures, and are indicated in the Bid Schedule.
   1. Administration:
      1. The Allowances specified in the Contract Specifications and indicated in the Bid Schedule are exclusive of any work indicated in the Contract Documents for which payment is included under other specifically designated items in the Bid Schedule. 
2. The Contractor may not proceed with any work under an Allowance, or receive payment for such work unless directed to do so by the Engineer using a Change Notice as described in General Conditions Article 7- Changes. The cost of the work shall either be an amount agreed upon by the City Engineer and the Contractor, or an amount specified by the City Engineer that the Contractor may not exceed without further direction from the City Engineer. 
3. Unless compensation for allowance work is agreed upon, a Force Account Daily Report form shall be used to track and record actual expenditures and expenses related to each allowance. Authorization for payments to the Contractor will be based on such Daily Reports and a related progress schedule. Payment may be made to the Contractor for amounts authorized by Change Notice, unless the total amount authorized exceeds the value of the Allowance indicated in the Bid Schedule. 
4. Upon Acceptance of the Work, a Change Order will be prepared, reflecting the exact amount due to the Contractor if different from the exact amounts stated in the Bid Schedule for the specified Allowances.
06. REJECTED, EXCESS, OR WASTED MATERIALS** 
   1. Quantities of material wasted or disposed of in a manner not called for under the Contract; rejected loads of material, including material rejected after it has been placed by reasons of the failure of the Contractor to conform to the provisions of the Contract; material not unloaded form the transporting vehicle; material placed outside the lines indicated on the Contract Drawings or established by the City Engineer; or material remaining on hand after completion of the Work, will not be paid for, and such quantities shall not be included in the final total quantities. No additional compensation will be permitted for loading, hauling, and disposing of rejected material. 
07. BID ITEM MEASUREMENTS AND PAYMENTS** 
1. ITEM 1. MOBILIZATION, DEMOBILIZATION AND TRENCH SAFETY MEASURES
   1. The lump sum bid price shall include the cost of mobilization and demobilization of equipment, materials, shoring, bracing, sloping, or other provisions to be made for worker protection from the hazard of traffic and caving ground during the excavation of trenches. Item 1 also includes obtaining of all bonds, insurance, and permits; moving onto and from the site all materials and equipment; and the furnishing and erecting of storage yards, temporary buildings, and other construction facilities; and all traffic control not included in item 2; all as required for the proper performance and completion of the Work.
1. ITEM 2. TRAFFIC CONTROL
   1. The lump sum bid price shall include routing of pedestrian, vehicular, and construction traffic; furnishing labor, tools, equipment, materials and incidentals for implementing and providing the traffic control devices, phasing, signage, striping, and personnel in accordance with the Contract Documents.
1. ITEMS 3, AND 4. FURNISH AND INSTALL 8-INCH, 12-INCH, AWWA C900 PC 305 (DR14) POLYVINYL CHLORIDE (PVC) PIPE
   1. The unit price bid per linear foot shall include the cost of but not limited to potholing, pavement cutting and removal, excavating pipe trench, tunneling, hauling, disposal, furnishing and placing blocking under pipe, furnishing and installing 8-inch AWWA C900 PC305 (DR14) PVC, 12-inch AWWA C900 PC305 (DR14) PVC water main, tracer wire, warning/identification tape, couplings, reducers, bends, adapters, tees, crosses, polyethylene encasement around ductile iron pipe and fittings and valves, valve boxes, joint restraints per Approved Plans, thrust blocks, chlorinating for disinfection, temporary blow piping, pressure testing, connecting to existing pipelines, casing pipe, temporary bulkheads, 1 sack slurry backfilling, temporary and permanent pavement resurfacing, thermoplastic traffic striping and markings, pavement markers, loop detectors, relocating and removing existing drain lines, dewatering, flushing and disinfecting, hydrostatic test, concrete cap where indicated on the plans, removal and replacement where required of existing improvements (exclusive of utilities), testing, removal and replacement where required of existing improvements which interfere with construction (includes all existing improvements located inside and outside the traveled roadway, such as pavement, curb, gutter, cross gutters, curb ramps, catch basin aprons, sidewalks, driveways, sprinklers, irrigation boxes, irrigation piping, parkways, landscaping, trees, fencing, steel traffic posts, etc.), abandoning or removing existing valves and abandoning piping in-place, removing existing service piping, maintaining continuous water service including all costs of high lining services not included in item 6, disposing of all excess excavated or removed material, and all other labor, equipment and material incidental to the installation of the pipe, complete in place. 
1. ITEMS 5, 6 AND 7. FURNISH AND INSTALL 6-INCH, 8-INCH, 12-INCH, PC 350 DUCTILE IRON (DIP) PIPE AND PIPE SPOOLS
   1. The unit price bid per linear foot shall include the cost of but not limited to potholing, pavement cutting and removal, excavating pipe trench, tunneling, hauling, disposal, furnishing and placing blocking under pipe, furnishing and installing 6-INCH PC350, 8-INCH PC350, and 12-INCH PC350 Ductile Iron Pipe (DIP) water main, tracer wire, warning/identification tape, couplings, reducers, bends, adapters, tees, crosses, polyethylene encasement around ductile iron pipe and fittings and valves, valve boxes, joint restraints per Approved Plans, thrust blocks, chlorinating for disinfection, temporary blow piping, pressure testing, connecting to existing pipelines, casing pipe, temporary bulkheads, 1 sack slurry backfilling, temporary and permanent pavement resurfacing, thermoplastic traffic striping and markings, pavement markers, loop detectors, relocating and removing existing drain lines, dewatering, flushing and disinfecting, hydrostatic test, concrete cap where indicated on the plans, removal and replacement where required of existing improvements (exclusive of utilities), testing, removal and replacement where required of existing improvements which interfere with construction (includes all existing improvements located inside and outside the traveled roadway, such as pavement, curb, gutter, cross gutters, curb ramps, catch basin aprons, sidewalks, driveways, sprinklers, irrigation boxes, irrigation piping, parkways, landscaping, trees, fencing, steel traffic posts, etc.), abandoning or removing existing valves and abandoning piping in-place, removing existing service piping, maintaining continuous water service including all costs of high lining services not included in item 6, disposing of all excess excavated or removed material, and all other labor, equipment and material incidental to the installation of the pipe, complete in place. 
1. ITEMS 8, 9, AND 10. FURNISH AND INSTALL 6-INCH, 8-INCH, and 12-INCH GATE VALVES** 
   1. The unit price bid for each valve shall include the cost of but not limited to furnishing and installing 6-inch, 8-inch, and 12-inch gate valves for water mains, installation hardware, anchor blocks, valve box and cover, slurry backfilling, pavement restoration, thrust blocks and all other labor, equipment and material incidental to the installation of the valve, complete in place.
1. ITEM 11. FURNISH AND INSTALL FIRE HYDRANT
   1. The unit price bid for furnishing and installing each fire hydrant assembly with check valve as shown on the plans. The work under this item shall include the cost of but not limited to pavement cutting and removal, excavating, shoring, tunneling, furnishing and placing concrete brick blocking under pipe, furnishing and installing 6-inch pipe, couplings, reducers, restrained joints, 6-inch gate valves, valve box and cover, slurry backfilling, temporary and permanent pavement resurfacing, traffic control, flushing and disinfecting, bacti test, flow test, hydrostatic test, removal and replacement where required of existing improvements (exclusive of utilities) which interfere with construction (includes all existing improvements located outside the traveled roadway, such as concrete curb and gutter, curb ramps, sidewalk, driveways, sprinklers, parkways, etc.), disposing and salvaging of existing fire hydrants and respective pipe, materials and concrete or thrust blocks, disposing of all excess excavated or removed material, and all other labor, equipment and material incidental to the installation of fire hydrant assembly, complete in place. Where a valve assembly is installed within concrete gutter, the Contractor shall replace a minimum of 10 linear feet of curb and gutter joint to joint, in kind, with no additional compensation. Re-sod all lawns that may have been damaged or removed using suitable topsoil. 
1. ITEMS 12, 13, and 14. FURNISH AND INSTALL NEW 1-INCH, 2-INCH, AND 4-INCH DOMESTIC SERVICES
   1. The unit price bid per each service installation shall include the locating and replacing all existing water services. The unit price shall include the cost of but not limited to pavement cutting and removal, excavating, shoring, tunneling, furnishing and installing all tubing, fittings (transition fittings), corporation and angle ball valves, service saddles, connecting to all existing services from the new main to the City side of the meter, removing existing water service piping, slurry backfilling, temporary resurfacing permanent resurfacing, traffic control, flushing and disinfecting, hydrostatic test, removal and replacement where required of existing improvements (exclusive of utilities) which interfere with construction (includes all existing improvements located outside the traveled roadway, such as curb, sidewalk, driveways, sprinklers, parkways, etc.), disposing of all excess excavated or removed material, and all other labor, equipment and material incidental to the installation or connection of 1-inch, 1-1/2-inch, 2-inch, 3-inch, and 4-inch (with gate valve) services complete in place. 
1. ITEMS 15, 16, 17, and 18. FURNISH AND INSTALL NEW 1-INCH, 1-1/2-INCH, 2-INCH, AND 3-INCH DOMESTIC SERVICES WITH METERS
   1. The unit price bid per each service installation shall include the locating and replacing all existing water services including the meter and meter box, where noted on U6886, Sheet N-2, Table 2. The unit price shall include the cost of but not limited to pavement cutting and removal, excavating, shoring, tunneling, furnishing and installing all tubing, fittings (transition fittings), corporation and angle ball valves, meter, meter box, service saddles, connecting to all existing services from the new main to the City side of the meter, removing existing water service piping, slurry backfilling, temporary resurfacing permanent resurfacing, traffic control, flushing and disinfecting, hydrostatic test, removal and replacement where required of existing improvements (exclusive of utilities) which interfere with construction (includes all existing improvements located outside the traveled roadway, such as curb, sidewalk, driveways, sprinklers, parkways, etc.), disposing of all excess excavated or removed material, and all other labor, equipment and material incidental to the installation or connection of 1-inch, 1-1/2-inch, 2-inch and 3-inch (with gate valve) services complete in place. 
1. ITEM 19. FURNISH AND INSTALL NEW 4-INCH FIRE SERVICE
   1. The unit price bid for each fire service shall include the locating and replacing all existing fire services with new, fully-restrained piping from the new water main to existing fire service piping at the property line. The unit price shall include the cost of but not limited to pavement cutting and removal, excavating, shoring, tunneling, furnishing and placing concrete brick blocking under pipe, furnishing and installing new pipe, couplings, restrained joints, gate valve, valve box and cover, slurry backfilling, temporary and permanent pavement resurfacing, traffic control, flushing and disinfecting, bacteria test, flow test, hydrostatic test, removal and replacement where required of existing improvements (exclusive of utilities) which interfere with construction (includes all existing improvements located outside the traveled roadway, such as concrete curb and gutter, sidewalk, driveways, sprinklers, parkways, etc.), disposing of all excess excavated or removed material, and all other labor, equipment and material incidental to the re-connection of fire service, complete in place.
1. ITEM 20. REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED OR INTERFERING PORTIONS OF PIPE** 
   1. The unit price per linear foot shall include the cost of but not limited to the removal and disposal of pipe, service laterals, and fire hydrant laterals, slurry and concrete encasement, including hauling and disposal fees, and all other labor, equipment and material incidental to the removal and disposal of the pipe including areas where existing water mains are to be removed and replaced. 
1. ITEM 21. PROVIDE ADDITIONAL UTILITY VERIFICATION/POTHOLING** 
   1. This item shall include providing utility verification and potholing of existing utilities as requested by the City Engineer. The utility verification/potholing identified in this ITEM is separate and in addition to the utility verification/potholing required by the contractor to construct water mains as identified in ITEM 3, 4 and 5. The work under this item shall include conducting exploratory excavations or potholing to verify or to discover the actual locations and the size of existing underground utilities and improvements. Upon completion of potholing in each area, potholes or excavation shall be immediately backfilled with 1 sack cement slurry in accordance with the specifications, or restored as directed by the City Engineer.
1. ITEM 22, 23, AND 24. FURNISH AND INSTALL TEMPORARY LINESTOPPING FOR 6-INCH, 8-INCH, AND 12-INCH EXISTING WATER MAINS
   1. This item shall include furnishing and installing temporary line stopping equipment to isolate tie in connections on 6-INCH, 8-INCH, and 12-INCH water mains for new water mains construction shown per Plans. The work under this item shall also include the cost of but not limited to the engineering, properly sizing and constructing thrust blocks, pavement cutting and removal, excavation, shoring, tunneling, furnishing and installing all line stopping equipment including required piping and fittings, corporation stops, valves, properly sized thrust blocks, slurry backfilling, temporary resurfacing, permanent resurfacing, traffic control, flushing and disinfecting, testing, removal and replacement where required of existing improvements (exclusive of utilities) which interfere with construction (includes all existing improvements located outside the traveled roadway, such as curb, sidewalk, driveways, irrigation piping, irrigation boxes, sprinklers, parkways, etc.), disposing of all excess excavated or removed material, and all other labor, equipment and material incidental to the installation of the line stopping equipment complete in place and removal. Refer to Specification Section 1045 article 3.03 for further line stopping requirements.
1. ITEM 25. ALLOWANCE FOR UNFORESEEN CONDITIONS
   1. This item is as described in paragraph 1.05 of this section. Use the allowance only as directed by City Engineer for Owner's purposes and only by Change Orders that indicate amounts to be charged to the allowance. At Project closeout, credit unused amounts remaining in the contingency allowance to Owner by Change Order.
1. ITEM 26. ALLOWANCE FOR ADDITIONAL VALVE REPLACEMENTS
   1. This item is as described in paragraph 1.05 of this section. Use the allowance only as directed by City Engineer for Owner's purposes and only by Change Orders that indicate amounts to be charged to the allowance. At Project closeout, credit unused amounts remaining in the contingency allowance to Owner by Change Order.
   1. END OF SECTION

