---
title: Progress Meetings
section: '013119.23'
divNumb: 1
divName: General Requirements
subgroup: General Requirements
tags: ['General', 'Requirements', 'Progress', 'Meetings']
---

1. SECTION 01310
1. PROGRESS SCHEDULES
1. 
## General

01. DESCRIPTION
   1. This section describes the scheduling of work requirements to be performed by the Contractor. The development of the schedule, monthly payment requisitions, and project status reporting requirements of the Contract shall employ computerized Critical Path Method scheduling. Prepare the CPM Schedule and all reports with the latest version of “Primavera,” or equal software.
02. RELATED WORK SPECIFIED ELSEWHERE
   1. Standard Drawings
2. Standard Specifications 01000, 01045, 01200, 01330, 01505, 01510, 01570, 02140, 02222, 02223, 02511, 02528, 02578, 03000, 03480, 03482, 09902, 09910, and Division 15.

03. QUALIFICATIONS
   1. Submit to the City Engineer a statement of computerized CPM qualifications verifying the Contractor's in-house staff or consultant capability to use CPM techniques required herein. Identify the individual who will perform the CPM scheduling and verify qualifications by providing a description of construction projects that the individual has successfully applied computerized CPM. List at least two projects of similar nature, scope, and value, and provide a contact person for each referenced project with current telephone, fax, email address, and mailing address information.
04. CPM STANDARDS
   1. CPM, as required herein, shall be interpreted to be generally as outlined in the Association of General Contractors publication, “The Use of CPM in Construction,” except that either “i-j” arrow diagrams or precedence diagramming format may be utilized. In the case of conflicts between this specification and the AGC publication, this specification shall govern.
   1. Include with construction schedules a graphic network diagram and computerized construction schedule reports.
   1. The CPM network shall be in a form of a time scaled “i-j” activity-on-arrow or precedence type diagram and may be divided into a number of separate sheets with suitable match lines relating the interface points among the sheets.
   1. Indicate all construction activities and procurement in a time-scaled format using a calendar time line shown along the entire sheet length. Plot each activity arrow or node so that the beginning and completion dates of each activity are accurately represented along the calendar time line. Show all activities using the symbols that clearly distinguish between Critical Path activities, non-critical activities, and free float for each noncritical activity. Identify all activity items by their respective Activity Number, Responsibility Code, Work Duration, and their Dollar Value. All non-critical path activities shall show their total float time in scale form by utilizing a dotted line or some other graphical means.
   1. Compute the duration estimate indicated for each activity in working days and represent the single best estimate considering the scope of the activity work and resources planned for the activity.
   1. Except where otherwise provided herein, float as referenced in these documents is total float. Total float is the period of time measured by the number of working days each non-critical path activity may be delayed
before it and its succeeding activities become part of the Critical Path. If a non-critical path activity is delayed beyond its float period, that activity then becomes part of the Critical Path and controls the end date of the Project. Thus, the delay of the non-critical path activity beyond its float period will cause delay to the Project itself.
   1. Duration of a single activity shall not be more than 10 calendar days on the CPM network.
05. CPM SCHEDULE SUBMITTALS
   1. Within 10 calendar days after the date of receipt of the Notice to Proceed, submit for review by the City Engineer one hard copy and one compact disc (CD-R format) of the initial CPM Network Schedule and the Computerized Schedule Report tabulation. The CPM Schedule shall be a time-scaled network diagram of the "i-j" activity-on-arrow or precedence type. The network diagram shall describe the activities to be accomplished and their logical relationships, and show the Critical Path.
   1. The computerized schedule report tabulations shall include the following:
      1. Report of activities sorted by Activity Number. Correlate Activity Numbers, where practical, to the Contractor's work areas.
2. Report of activities sorted by Early Start date.
3. Report of activities sorted by Total Float.
4. Report of activities sorted by Responsibility Code. Responsibility Codes shall be established for the Contractor, Engineer, Water Authority, subcontractors, suppliers, etc. Codes shall be identified in the Network Diagram.
5. A Successor-Predecessor Report which shall identify the successor and predecessor activities for each activity and ties between schedule activities.
   1. Include sufficient detail for the identification of work components into such activities as mobilization and demobilization; clearing and grubbing; temporary erosion control installation and removal; traffic control; dewatering; shoring and bracing installation and removal; trenching, backfilling and compaction; blasting; tunneling; final grading; restoration and revegetation; pavement repair; pipe fabrication; pipe installation; pipe lining; coating of field joints; installing valves and miscellaneous piping; testing and disinfection; placing reinforcement; forming, placing and curing of concrete; masonry construction; miscellaneous metals fabrication and installation; painting and coating; installation of electrical and instrumentation equipment; and other such work.
   1. Within 5 calendar days after submittal of initial CPM Network Schedule, meet with the City Engineer to review such submittal. The City Engineer's review will be limited to the submittal's conformance to the Contract requirements, and may include directions to include activities and information missing from the submittal and requests to the Contractor to clarify his schedule.
   1. Revise the initial CPM Network Schedule submittal to address all review comments received from the Engineer and resubmit the Network Diagrams and reports. The City Engineer will either (1) accept the resubmitted schedule, or (2) advise the Contractor in writing to review any part or parts of the schedule, which either do not meet the Contract requirements or are unsatisfactory for the City Engineer to monitor the project's progress and status. The City Engineer may accept the schedule with conditions that the first monthly CPM Schedule update be revised to correct deficiencies identified. When the CPM Schedule is accepted, it shall be considered as the "Baseline CPM Construction Schedule." The Water Authority reserves the right to require that the Contractor adjust, add to, or clarify any portion of the CPM Schedule, which may later be discovered to be insufficient for the monitoring of the work.
   1. Acceptance of the Baseline CPM Construction Schedule by the City Engineer shall be a CONDITION PRECEDENT to holding the Pre-Construction Conference, mobilizing any labor, equipment and materials at the site of work, and processing any Application for Payment subsequent to the first monthly payment.
   1. By way of the Contractor assigning activity durations and proposing the sequence of the work, the Contractor agrees to utilize sufficient and necessary management and other resources to perform the work in accordance with the CPM Schedule.
   1. Submission of the Baseline CPM Construction Schedule to City Engineer shall not relieve the Contractor of his total responsibility for scheduling, sequencing, and pursuing the work to comply with the requirements of the Contract Documents, including adverse effects such as delays resulting from ill-timed work.
   1. Following the acceptance of the Contractor's Baseline CPM Construction Schedule, monitor the progress of the work and adjust the Schedule each month to reflect actual progress and any changes in planned future activities. Submit each CPM Schedule monthly update to meet all requirements as indicated herein for the original schedule submittal. Show all work activities on each update, including those already completed. Accurately show the "record" information for completed work activities by indicating when the work was actually started and completed.
   1. The CPM Schedule update submittal will be reviewed with the Contractor during monthly construction progress meetings. Subsequent to such meetings, submit on or before the fifth day of each month a revised CPM Network Diagram, revised CPM computerized tabulations, and revised Successor-Predecessor Report. Acceptance of the monthly Schedule Update submittal shall be a condition precedent to processing each monthly application for payment.
   1. Highlight or otherwise identify all changes to the Schedule. Modify any portions of the CPM Schedule, which become infeasible because of activities behind schedule or for any other valid reason.
   1. Neither the submission nor the updating of the Contractor's Schedule submittal, nor the City Engineer's review or acceptance of any such Schedule shall have the effect of modifying the Contract completion date or milestone dates or the Contractor's obligations under this Contract.
06. CHANGE ORDERS
   1. Incorporate approved Change Orders in the Schedule Update submittal for the next month following Change Order approval. Utilize a sub-network in the schedule depicting the changed work and its effect on other activities. Tie this sub network to the main network with the appropriate logic so that a true analysis of the Critical Path can be made.
07. SCHEDULE REPORTS (FORMAT)
   1. Prepare Schedule Reports based on the Construction Schedule, and include the following minimum data for each activity:
      1. Activity Numbers and Responsibility Codes.
2. Work Order Number.
3. Estimated Activity Duration.
4. Activity Description.
5. Activity's Percent Completion.
6. Early Start Date (Calendar Dated).
7. Early Finish Date (Calendar Dated).
8. Late Start Date (Calendar Dated).
9. Late Finish Date (Calendar Dated).
10. Status (Whether Critical).
11. Total Float for Each Activity.
12. Free Float for Each Activity.
   1. Preface each Schedule Report with the following summary data:
      1. Project Name.
2. Contractor.
3. Type of Tabulation.
4. Project Duration.
5. Contract Completion Date (revised to reflect time extensions).
6. The Commencement Date stated in the Notice to Proceed.
7. The Data Date and Plot Date of the Network Diagram.
8. If an update, cite the new schedule completion date.
1. PART 2 - MATERIALS (NOT USED)
1. 

## Execution

 (NOT USED)
1. END OF SECTION

