---
title: Submittal Procedures
section: '013300'
divNumb: 1
divName: General Requirements
subgroup: General Requirements
tags: ['General', 'Requirements', 'Submittal', 'Procedures']
---

1. SECTION 01330
   1. CONTRACTOR SUBMITTALS 
0
## General


## General

:
      1. Wherever submittals are required hereunder, all such submittals by the Contractor shall be submitted to the Engineer. A Submittal is defined as any drawing, calculation, specification, product data, samples, manuals, requests for substitutes, spare parts, photographs, survey data, record drawings, bonds, or similar items required to be submitted to the City Engineer under the terms of the contract.
   1. Before issuance of Notice to Proceed, the Contractor shall submit the following submittal items to the Engineer for review:
      1. A Preliminary Construction Schedule indicating the starting and completion dates of the various stages of the Work. Section 01310 Progress Schedules.
2. A preliminary schedule of Shop Drawings, Samples, and proposed substitutes or "Or Equal" submittals.
3. A list of all permits and licenses the Contractor shall obtain indicating the agency required to grant the permit and the expected date of submittal for the permit and required date for receipt of the permit.
4. A preliminary schedule of values (lump sum price breakdown for all of the Work which will include quantities and prices of items aggregating the Contract Price and will subdivide the Work into component parts in sufficient detail to serve as the basis for progress payments during construction. Such prices shall include an appropriate amount of overhead and profit applicable to each item of work which will be confirmed in writing by the Contractor at the time of submittal.
   1. Submittals:
      1. Before the preconstruction meeting, the Contractor shall submit to the Engineer proposed Substitutes or "Or Equal" products for the Engineer's review and approval. All such submittals shall be in conformance with the requirements of Paragraph 1.06, herein.
   1. The Contractor hereby agrees that failure to submit alternative product requests within the stipulated time period shall act as a waiver of any future rights to offer such substitutes, and the Contractor hereby agrees to provide one of the specific products called for in the Contract Documents.
02. RELATED WORK SPECIFIED ELSEWHERE
   1. Standard Drawings
2. General Conditions
3. Standard Specifications 01000, 01045, 01200, 01310, 01505, 01510, 01570, 02140, 02222, 02223, 02511, 02528, 02578, 03000, 03480, 03482, 09902, 09910, and Division 15.
03. PERMITS
   1. Obtain all permits and licenses necessary to the prosecution of the work. Submit a copy of all permits and licenses to the Engineer within 30 days of issuance.
   1. The Contractor and all his subcontractors, vendors and service providers shall comply with the regulations as stated in each permit for the applicable portion of the work governed by the respective permit. Failure by the Contractor, its subcontractors, vendors and service providers to comply with any permit requirements may cause monetary fines or other such retribution against the City by the permit-granting agency. Permit fines or other such retribution against the City that result from the acts or negligence of the Contractor, its subcontractors, vendors and service providers shall be paid for by the Contractor by deducting from the monies due the Contractor under this Contract.
04. SHOP DRAWINGS
   1. Wherever called for in the Contract Documents, or where required by the Engineer, the Contractor shall furnish to the Engineer for review, 6 copies of each shop drawing submittal. The term "Shop Drawings" as used herein shall be understood to include detail design calculations, shop drawings, fabrication and installation drawings, erection drawings, lists, graphs, operating instruction, catalog sheets, data sheets, and similar items. Unless otherwise required, said Shop Drawings shall be submitted to the Engineer at a time sufficiently early to allow review of same by the Engineer, and to accommodate the rate of construction progress required under the Contract.
   1. All Shop Drawings shall be accompanied by the City Engineer's standard submittal transmittal form. This form may be obtained in quantity from the Engineer at reproduction cost. Any submittal not accompanied by such a form, or where all applicable items on the form are completed, will be returned for resubmittal.
   1. Normally, a separate transmittal form shall be used for each specific items or class of material or equipment for which a submittal is required. Transmittal of a submittal of various items using a single transmittal form will be permitted only when the items taken together constitute a manufacturer's "package" or are so functionally related that expediency indicates review of the group or package as a whole. A multiple-page submittal shall be collated into sets, and each set shall be stapled or bound, as appropriate, prior to transmittal to the Engineer.
   1. Except as may otherwise be provided herein, the Engineer will return prints of each submittal to the Contractor, with its comments noted thereon, within 20 calendar days following their receipt by the Engineer. It is considered reasonable that the Contractor shall make a complete and acceptable submittal to the Engineer by the second submission of a submittal item. The City reserves the right to withhold monies due the Contractor to cover additional cost of the Engineer's review beyond the second submittal.
   1. If a copy of a submittal is returned to the Contractor marked "APPROVED" or "ACCEPTED" or "NO EXCEPTIONS TAKEN," formal revision and resubmission of said submittal will not be required.
   1. If a copy of the submittal is returned to the Contractor marked "AMEND-RESUBMIT," the Contractor shall revise said submittal and shall resubmit a copy of said revised submittal to the Engineer.
   1. If a copy of the submittal is returned to the Contractor marked "REJECTED-RESUBMIT," the Contractor shall revise said submittal and shall resubmit a copy of said revised submittal to the Engineer.
   1. Fabrication of an item may be commenced only after the Engineer has reviewed the pertinent submittals and returned copies to the Contractor marked either "NO EXCEPTIONS TAKEN" or "APPROVED" or “ACCEPTED" or "MAKE CORRECTIONS NOTED" Corrections indicated on submittals shall be considered as changes necessary to meet the requirements of the Contract Documents and shall not be taken as the basis of claims for extra work.
   1. All Contractor submittals shall be carefully reviewed against the contract documents by an authorized representative of the Contractor, prior to submittal to the Engineer. A letter of affidavit shall be included with each submittal stating the contract documents have been reviewed and the submitted product is correct for the project application and in strict conformance with the contract documents. The letter affidavit must be dated and signed by both the Contractor and the product manufacturer or service provider. In the case of shop drawings, each sheet shall be so dated and signed for approval. No consideration for review by the Engineer of any Contractor submittals will be made for any items which are not accompanied with an affidavit. All submittals without an affidavit will be returned to the Contractor without action taken by the Engineer, and any delays caused thereby shall be the total responsibility of the Contractor.
   1. The Engineer's review of Contractor submittals shall not relieve the Contractor of the entire responsibility for the correctness of details and dimensions. The Contractor shall assume all responsibility and risk for any misfits due to any errors in Contractor submittals. The Contractor shall be responsible for the dimensions and the design of adequate connections and details.
1. Refer to GENERAL CONDITION Articles 3.12 for additional requirements.
05. COLLECTION OF GPS COORDINATE DATA:
      1. The Contractor shall collect as-built data along the alignment of the new water main. This data shall include all valves, fittings, pipeline horizontal and vertical angle points, vaults, manholes and appurtenances. Straight alignment segments of the new water main shall include as-built data every 200 linear feet. Each collected data point shall contain at a minimum the X, Y, & Z coordinate, a unique point no., and a description of the nature of the point (i.e. tee, valve, etc.). The Z coordinate shall be taken at the outside top of the pipe or fitting. Horizontal coordinates shall be based on the geodetic network shown on the map filed at Book 162, Page 59 of Records of Survey, Los Angeles County Recorder. Vertical coordinates shall be based on local city benchmarks. The required precision or resolution shall be “sub-foot,” <0.1’. It is up to the Contractor’s discretion as to what method will be used to collect the data, be it conventional survey, GPS or other methods as long as those methods and procedures satisfy the data requirements.
06. PROPOSED SUBSTITUTES OR "OR EQUAL" ITEMS
   1. For convenience in designation in the Contract Documents, any material, product, or equipment to be incorporated in the Work may be designated under a brand or trade name or the name of a manufacturer and its catalog information. The use of any substitute material, product, or equipment which is equal in quality and utility and possesses the required characteristics for the purpose intended will be permitted, subject to the following requirements:
      1. The burden of proof as to the quality and utility of any such substitute material, product, or equipment shall be upon the Contractor.
2. The Engineer will be the sole judge as to the quality and utility of any such substitute material, product, or equipment and its decision shall be final.
   1. Wherever in the Contract Documents the name or the name and address of a manufacturer or Supplier is given for a material, product, or equipment, or if any other source of a material, product, or equipment is indicated therefore, such information is given for the convenience of the Contractor only, and no limit, restriction, or direction is indicated or intended thereby, nor is the accuracy or reliability of such information guaranteed. It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to determine the accurate identity and location of any such manufacturer, Supplier, or other source of any material, product, or equipment called for in the Contract Documents.
   1. The Contractor may offer any material, product, or equipment which it considers equal to those specified. Unless otherwise provided by law or authorized in writing by the Engineer, the substantiation of any proposed substitute or "or-equal" material, product, or equipment must be submitted **within 10 days after the submission of the Bid to substantiate substitution of “or equal items**. The Contractor, at its sole expense, shall furnish data concerning items it has offered as substitute or "or-equal" to those specified. The Contractor shall provide the data required by the Engineer to determine that the quality, strength, physical, chemical, or other characteristics, including durability, finish, efficiency, dimensions, service, and suitability are such that the substitute or "or-equal" item will fulfill its intended function.
   1. The Contractor's attention is further directed to the requirement that its failure to submit data substantiating a request for a substitution of an "or equal" item within said allowed period shall be deemed to mean that the Contractor intends to furnish one of the specific brand or trade-named material, product, or equipment specified in the Contract Documents and the Contractor does hereby waive all rights to offer or use substitute materials, products, or equipment in each such case. Wherever a proposed substitute material, product, or equipment has not been submitted within said 35-day period, or wherever the submission of a proposed substitute materials, product, or equipment fails to meet the requirements of the Specifications and an acceptable resubmittal is not received by the Engineer within said 35-day period, the Contractor shall furnish only one of the materials, products, or equipment originally-named in the Contract Documents. Approval by the Engineer of a substitute item proposed by the Contractor shall not relieve Contractor of the responsibility for full compliance with the contract Documents and for adequacy of the substituted item. The Contractor shall also be responsible for resultant changes and all additional costs which the substitution requires in its work, the work of its subcontractors and of other contractors and shall effect such changes without cost to City.
 Should the approved substitutions result in a lowering of project cost, the City may require as a condition of approval a contract cost reduction.
   1. Refer to GENERAL CONDITION Articles 3.13 additional requirements.
07. SAMPLES
   1. Unless otherwise specified, whenever in the Specifications samples are required, the Contractor shall submit not less than 3 units of each such sample item or material to the Engineer for approval at no additional cost to the City.
   1. Samples, as required herein, shall be submitted for approval a minimum of 21 days prior to ordering such material for delivery to the job-site, and shall be submitted in an orderly sequence so that dependent materials or equipment can be assembled and reviewed without causing delays in the Work.
   1. All samples shall be individually and indelibly labeled or tagged, indicating thereon all specified physical characteristics and manufacturer's names for identification and submittal to the Engineer for approval. Upon receiving approval of the Engineer, one set of the samples will be stamped and dated by the Engineer and returned to the Contractor, one set will be retained by the Engineer, and one set of samples shall remain at the job site for reference by the Engineer and the Resident Project Representative until completion of the Work.
   1. Unless otherwise specified, all colors and textures of specified items will be selected by the Engineer from the manufacturer's standard colors and standard materials, products, or equipment lines.
08. DAILY REPORTS
   1. Provide for each work shift a written Daily Report to the Engineer describing the work performed, conditions encountered, weather conditions, delays to the work, accidents or safety concerns, and any construction problems or deviations from the requirements of the Contract Documents. Show on the Daily Report an itemized breakdown of all labor, material deliveries, equipment, and subcontract labor used in performing the work. Submit the Daily Report within two days after completion of the reported work shift.
11. RECORD DRAWINGS

## General

:
      1. The Contractor shall keep and maintain, at the job site, one record set of Contract Drawings. On these, it shall mark all project conditions, locations, configurations, and any other changes or deviations which may vary from the details represented on the original Contract Drawings, including buried or concealed construction and utility features which are revealed during the course of construction.
   1. Special attention shall be given to recording the horizontal and vertical location of all buried utilities that differ from the locations indicated, or which were not indicated on the Contract Drawings. Said record drawings shall be supplemented by any detailed sketches as necessary or directed to indicate, fully, the Work as actually constructed.
   1. These master record drawings of the Contractor's representation of "as-built" conditions, including all revisions made necessary by addenda, change orders, and the like shall be maintained up-to-date during the progress of the Work.
   1. In the case of those drawings which depict the detail requirement for equipment to be assembled in the factory, the record drawings shall be updated by indicating those portions which are superseded by change order drawings or final shop drawings, and by including appropriate reference information describing the change orders by number and the shop drawings by manufacturer, drawing, and revision numbers.
   1. Record drawings prepared by the Contractor shall be accessible to the Engineer at all times during the construction period and shall be delivered to the Engineer upon completion of the work.
   1. Effect on progress Payments:
      1. Requests for partial payments will not be approved if the record drawings are not kept current. All such Record Drawings will be inspected by the Engineer each month, showing all variations between the Work as actually constructed and as originally shown on the Contract Drawings or other Contract Documents, and the City will not process monthly payment requests until such drawings are made current each month.
   1. Final Record Drawings:
      1. Upon substantial completion of the Work and prior to final acceptance by the City, the Contractor shall complete and deliver the completed set of Record Drawings to the Engineer for transmittal to the City, conforming to the construction records of the Contractor. This set of drawings shall consist of corrected plans showing the reported location of the Work. The information submitted by the Contractor and incorporated by the Engineer into the Record Drawings will be assumed to the reliable, and the Engineer will not be responsible for the accuracy of such information, nor for any errors or omissions which may appear on the Record Drawings as a result.
   1. Effect on Final Payment. Final payment will not be approved until the Contractor- prepared Final Record Drawings have been delivered to the Engineer. Said up-to-date, Record Drawings may be in the form of a set of prints with carefully plotted information overlaid in pencil.
12. CONSTRUCTION PHOTOGRAPHS
   1. The Contractor shall provide monthly construction photographs showing the daily progress of the Work.
1. END OF SECTION

