---
title: Temporary Tree and Plant Protection
section: '015639'
divNumb: 1
divName: General Requirements
subgroup: General Requirements
tags: ['General', 'Requirements', 'Temporary', 'Tree', 'Plant', 'Protection']
---


   1. Temporary Tree and Plant Protection

## General

1. SUMMARY
   1. Work under this section shall consist of retention and protection of trees and landscape material during the construction of the project.
2. Related specification sections include:
	1. Section 02 40 00, Demolition
	2. General Requirements
3. Contractor shall flag trees to be removed as well as trees to remain, prior to construction as directed by the Project Engineer. Trees located in the City Right of Way that are proposed for removal but are not shown to be removed on the Drawings shall be approved for removal by the City Engineer. Marking flags for each designation shall be distinctly different colored, as approved by the Project Engineer.
4. There should be daily supervision of field crews by the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist during the critical phases of the project, for example:
      1. demolition of existing concrete; root pruning; construction of retaining walls and construction of new curb or sidewalk in tree protection areas. Owner shall be responsible for retaining Project Consulting Arborist for applicable phases of the project.
5. If it appears that the completion of the construction may cause damage to the branches of any tree, the Contractor shall contact the Project Engineer. The Project Engineer will make a determination as to whether such damage is eminent.
6. To prevent or minimize soil compaction, designated routes for equipment and foot traffic by work crews shall be determined prior to commencing construction activities, and shall be indicated in the tree protection plan to be submitted by Contractor. These routes shall be marked at the site, prior to commencement of construction, with tree protection fencing and signage as specified in this section.
7. Motorized equipment and trailers, including tractors, bobcats, bulldozers, trackhoes, trucks, cars, and carts shall not be allowed access within tree protection areas. Should access be necessary within designated tree protection areas, the existing grade shall be covered with six (6) to eight (8) inches of wood mulch to help distribute the weight of equipment and to minimize soil compaction and rutting. Plywood and/or mulch is not acceptable bridging material for driving over exposed tree roots. Exposed tree roots shall not be driven over. The Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist shall be notified and shall approve of the access and driving surface prior to its use.
8. Materials and supplies shall not be stockpiled or stored within the tree protection area. Should temporary storage be necessary within designated tree protection areas, the existing grade shall be covered with double, overlapping sheets of ¾ inch thick plywood, or six (6) to eight (8) inches of wood mulch to help distribute the weight of materials or supplies and to minimize soil compaction.
9. Under no circumstances shall any objects or materials be leaned against or supported by a tree's trunk, branches, or exposed roots. The attachment or installation to trees of any sign, cable, wire, nail, swing, or any other material that is not needed to help support the natural structure of the tree is prohibited. Standard arboricultural techniques such as bracing or cabling that are performed by professional arborists are acceptable upon approval by the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist.
	1. Definitions
10. TREE PROTECTION AREA: Generally, a tree protection area should consist of the ground encompassing from 1.5 (minimum) to 2.0 times the distance between the trunk and dripline, or one linear foot away from the trunk base for every inch diameter of the trunk, whichever is greater, unless otherwise directed by Project Engineer. (See section below). Areas of ground covered by pavement, buildings, or other permanent structures where the presence of roots is minimal or negligible are excluded. The area under or within the trees dripline is also referred to as the "Critical Root Zone" (see below). Materials to be reused shall be protected from defacing or damage, and shall be reused in conformance with the applicable specification sections and in the configuration shown on the construction plans.
	1. With groups of trees or where an array effect is present, there may be discontinuous (non-overlapping) perimeters of tree protection areas which result in difficult to maintain or ineffective tree protection fencing. in these cases, even though tree protection areas do not overlap, they should be treated as though they do if the distance between the perimeters of such areas is less than thirty (30) feet. In effect, this will artificially enlarge the area of tree protection, but will result in a more clearly defined, manageable area.
11. DRIPLINE: The outermost edge of the tree's canopy or branch spread. The area within a tree's dripline is all the ground under the total branch spread.
12. CRITICAL ROOT ZONE: Generally, all of the ground area included in the dripline.
13. DIAMETER (CALIPER): The size (in inches) of a tree's trunk is measured at:
	1.  Six (6) inches above grade for trunk diameters up to and including four (4) inches;
	2. Twelve (12) inches above grade for trunk diameters from four (4) inches up to and including eight (8) inches;
	3. Four and a half (4½) feet above grade for trunk diameters greater than eight (8) inches; in accordance with guidelines established in the "Guide for Plant Appraisal". All measurements should be rounded to the nearest inch.
14. HIGH-VALUE SHRUB: Any specimen shrub with an appraised value of $100.00 or more.
15. PROJECT CONSULTING ARBORIST: An independent consultant with a degree in a field related to arboriculture, and at least five years field experience in tree preservation or on-site monitoring of public works or construction projects involving tree retention and protection. The Consultant should be an active member in the American Society of Consulting Arborists and International Society of Arboriculture.
	1. Reference Standards and Guidelines
16. Contractor shall comply with applicable requirements and recommendations of the most current versions of the following standards and guidelines. Where these conflict with other specified requirements, the more restrictive requirements shall govern.
	1. ANSI Z133.1-1988 - American National Standard for Tree Care Operations
	2. ANSI A300-1994 - Standard Practices for Trees, Shrubs and Other Woody Plant Maintenance
	3. NATIONAL ARBORIST ASSOCIATION STANDARDS - Pruning, Cabling and Bracing, Fertilization
	4. GUIDE FOR PLANT APPRAISAL-8TH EDITION, Authored by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers; published by the International Society of Arboriculture.

## Product 

 (Not Used)


## Execution

1. 3.1 Construction Requirements
   1. This section provides standards and guidelines for the retention and protection of trees and high-value shrubs for any proposed public works or construction project.
1. 3.2 Demolition of Existing Concrete
   1. Caution should be used during removal of existing street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, drain inlets, and other concrete and asphalt demolition, to minimize injury to tree root systems. The following procedures should be used when removing existing concrete.
	1. Breaking of the existing concrete and asphalt for removal should be done in a manner that will minimize ground disturbance and vibration.
	2. Curbs and sidewalks within designated tree protection areas and critical root zones shall be removed by hand. When removing existing sidewalks and curbs, care should be taken to avoid injury to roots located under, over, or adjacent to paved surfaces.
	3. Roots and root-trunk flares growing over curbs should not be injured during breaking of curbs and removal of debris. Wood and bark tissues shall not be injured by striking tissues with equipment.
	4. During the removal of concrete, all root systems and soil areas exposed shall not be disturbed.
	5. Motorized equipment and trailers, including tractors, Bobcats, bulldozers, trackhoes, trucks, cars, and carts are to be limited to access on the existing paved street only. Access is not allowed behind the curb within tree protection areas.
	6. Should access be necessary within designated tree protection areas, the existing grade shall be covered with double, overlapping sheets of ¾ inch thick plywood, or six (6) to eight (8) inches of wood mulch to help distribute the weight of equipment and to minimize soil compaction and rutting. Plywood and/or mulch is not acceptable bridging material for driving over exposed tree roots. Exposed tree roots shall not be driven over. The Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist shall be notified and shall approve of the access and driving surface prior to its use.
1. 3.3 Construction of Sidewalks, Curbs, Concrete, Asphalt Paving and Drainage Inlets
   1. The following procedures shall be used when constructing sidewalks, curbs, concrete, asphalt paving, and drainage inlets.
2. Keep all materials and equipment within the street bounded by existing curbs.
3. Protect exposed roots from contamination by stabilization materials and concrete.
4. Locate concrete washout areas away from roots and tree protection areas.
5. When excavating for the construction of inlets, excavated soil shall be deposited in trucks and hauled off or deposited temporarily on ¾ inch thick plywood outside the critical root zone. Excavated and fill soil shall not be deposited, even temporarily, on unprotected natural grade.
6. After proper pruning, as needed, cover exposed roots within thirty (30) minutes to minimize desiccation. Roots may be covered with soil, mulch, or moistened burlap (7 ounce or equivalent), and shall be kept moist during the period until the final grade is established.
7. Where possible, sidewalks should be raised or relocated to prevent cutting and removing major roots (e.g. roots greater than three inches in diameter).
8. Place a sheet of six (6) mil or thicker plastic over the grade within affected portions of tree protection areas prior to pouring concrete sidewalks, curbs, inlets, ramps, and driveway approaches. The plastic will assist in providing a non-leaching barrier between the concrete, soil and roots.
9. Limit grading to a maximum of two (2) inches of fill over natural grade within critical root zones. Fill should consist of sandy loam topsoil. Clay soils shall not be used as fill. When using fill soil, the existing surface to receive fill should be scarified prior to filling. Any filling operation should not occur during water saturated soil conditions.
10. Existing soil may be used as a form for back of curb and gutter, with or without the use of a thin masonite-type form, although a masonite form is preferred. This will minimize excavation in the critical root zone and prevent undue injury to the roots. This method is unnecessary in areas outside the critical root zone. Place a layer of Typar BioBarrier between the curb and tree roots to help inhibit root growth that may exploit small cracks in the curb. Were appropriate, use curbs with discontinuous footings to maintain natural grade near the base of trees adjacent to the curbing, and to minimize injury to roots and root flares.
11. Provide for easy concrete removal and replacement where an obvious raised root may cause sidewalk cracking in the future. This can be accomplished by installing an expansion joint on either side of the root or by etching the concrete on either side of the root to allow that particular section to be broken out and replaced. Compaction rating for the replacement walkway should not exceed 80% Proctor density. Tree roots will continue to slowly add girth every year; therefore, the base material needs to be malleable (e.g. suitable subgrade aggregates, crushed granite, or compacted sand) to prevent a fulcrum or pressure point which can crack or heave the walkway.
12. Where appropriate, and under the direction of the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist, root restricting barriers can be installed with a minimal amount of disturbance. There are several promising landscape related materials used as barriers to root growth, especially away from sidewalks, curbs and streets. Three such materials are: a. A stiff nylon woven fabric (Q899 nylon fabric with extra firm finish from Jason Mills, Westwood, NJ);
	1. 14-mesh or smaller copper wire screen;
	2. Typar BioBarrier (REEMAY, Inc., Old Hickory, TN). The nylon fabric has holes approximately 1/26th-inch square separated by strands approximately 1/26th-inch thick, with strands fused together. Copper screen has been shown to be effective in controlling seedling root growth. Typar BioBarrier is a commercial product developed specifically to control roots of trees, and consists of a felt-like spun-bounded polypropylene fabric to which polyethylene pellets are attached at one and a half (1½) by one and a half (1½) inch spacing. The pellets are impregnated with the herbicide Trifluralin and release it slowly over time (many years). After a two (2) foot deep, narrow trench is dug adjacent to the curb, sidewalk, or other structure involved, and after any affected roots are properly pruned, the material of choice should be placed against the side of the wall closest to the roots that were severed (side of the wall farthest from the structure being protected). Note: This procedure should not be used if large, existing roots (four (4) inches or larger in diameter) will be severed. The nylon fabric and copper screen will constrict roots to the size of the openings in the material; beyond the constrictions, roots will be greatly stunted except for knobs that form against the barriers. The barrier should be installed at least eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches deep (in a vertical plane).
13. In areas where roots have to be removed for construction of drain inlets, roots shall be severed prior to excavation to eliminate unnecessary tearing of roots by equipment. a. Excavate soil by hand at the construction cut limit to a depth of thirty (30) inches or to the depth of the required root cut, whichever is less.
	1. Prune roots as specified in Part 3, 3.1, D of this section.
	2. Protect exposed roots as specified in Part 3, 3.1, B.5 of this section.
14. Concrete or chemicals spilled qwithin tree protection areas should be completely removed. Contamination soil shall be completely removed at the time of the spill and removed by hand without disturbance to root systems. Appropriate soil should be added as necessary to restore the grade.
1. 3.4 Irrigation or Utility Installation
   1. Protection of Trees and High Value Shrubs
2. Contractor shall protect all trees and high-value shrubs from injury due to irrigation related work. All injuries to trees and high-value shrubs shall be mitigated to the satisfaction of the Owner, and, if appropriate in accordance with guidelines established in the "Guide for Plant Appraisal". All costs of such mitigating shall be charged to and paid by the Contractor.
3. All irrigation lines shall be indicated on construction plans and pre-approved by the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist. Unless absolutely necessary, no irrigation lines shall be located within 10 feet of any existing tree trunk. (See item 2 below).
4. Existing Trees
5. The Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist shall be notified prior to any trenching or excavation known or suspected to involve cutting of more than:
      1. a. two roots, three inches or more in diameter; and/or four roots between two (2) and three (3) inches in diameter. The Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist shall be notified immediately in the event that roots in excess of that described above are cut, torn, ripped, or otherwise injured.
6. All trenching or other work under the dripline of any tree shall be done by hand or by other methods which will prevent breakage or other injury to branches and roots.
7. Where it is necessary to excavate within the critical root zone of existing trees, contractor shall use all possible care to avoid injury to trees and tree roots. Excavation, in areas where two (2) inch diameter and larger roots occur, shall be done by hand with approved hand tools. Where possible, tree roots two (2) inches or larger in diameter shall be tunneled or bored under and shall be covered with moistened burlap to prevent excessive drying.
8. Wherever a trenching machine exposes roots smaller than two (2) inches in diameter, such roots extending through the trench wall shall be hand pruned (see Part 3, 3.1, D of this section. All trenches within critical root zones shall be closed within twelve (12) hours-if this is not possible, the trench walls shall be covered with burlap and kept moistened. Prior to backfilling, Contractor shall contact the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist to inspect the condition and treatment of roots larger than two (2) inches in diameter injured by trenching.
9. Horizontal directional boring (auger tunneling), rather than open trenching, should be used for irrigation line or other utility installation within one half (½) foot linear distance from the trunk base for every inch of trunk diameter, if root disruption or utility installation occurs on no more than one side of the tree. If trenching or utility installation will occur on two or more sides of a tree trunk (e.g. N,S,E, or W), then horizontal directional boring should be used if line installation is within one (1) foot linear distance from the trunk base for every inch of trunk diameter.
10. Root Pruning
11. Tree roots shall not be pruned or cut unless their removal is unavoidable or absolutely necessary. The Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist shall be notified prior to any operation known or suspected to involve cutting of more than: a. two roots, three (3) inches or more in diameter; and/or b. four (4) roots between two (2) and three (3) inches in diameter. The Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist shall be notified immediately in the event that roots in excess of that described above are cut, torn, ripped, or otherwise injured.
12. Upon approval by the 's Project Engineer, prior to any excavation, removal of sidewalk, or other activity that will result in removal of soil and tree roots, all tree roots within a designated area will be pruned to a depth of fourteen (14) inches. Pruning shall occur with a Dosko Root Pruner, or equivalent, in accessible areas, and by hand in areas inaccessible to the root pruning machine. All other root pruning shall be done by hand with approved tools.
13. Removal of roots greater than one (1) inch diameter or parts of roots that are injured or diseased should be performed as follows:
	1. Preserve the root bark ridge (similar in structure and function to a branch bark ridge). Directional root pruning is the recommendation technique and should be used during hand excavation around tree roots. Roots are similar to branches in their response to pruning practices. With directional root pruning, objectionable and severely injured roots are properly cut to a lateral root, if possible, that is growing downward or in a favorable direction.
	2. All roots needing to be pruned or removed shall be cut cleanly with sharp hand tools, with oversight by the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist. No wound dressings shall be used.
	3. Recommended root pruning tools:
		1. Scissor-type lopper
		2. Scissor-type pruner
		3. Large and small hand saws
		4. Wound scriber
		5. Towel or small shovel
		6. Garden Fork
		7. Hand broom
14. Root Pruning Near Sidewalks
	1. Root pruning should be done carefully, by hand, to achieve the objective of reducing future sidewalk problems as well as preserving the trees. Removing anchoring roots or causing injuries in anchoring roots and root flares can cause future decay and windthrow hazards. Indiscriminate cutting of vigorous roots results in their resprouting so that several more new roots may grow from the cut end, back under the sidewalk, thereby reducing the time between sidewalk repairs. Roots can be managed in the ground without significant harm to trees, if care is taken to avoid injuries that lead to root and trunk decay.
	2. Directional root pruning is recommended because it considers the tree's response to root pruning and decay. With directional root pruning, roots are cut to a large lateral, if possible, that is growing downward or in a more favorable direction. The pruned root ends will be less likely to resprout, since a large lateral can assume the new terminal role of the root.
	3. Proper removal of selected roots or parts of roots can direct roots away from sidewalks in the future. Procedures for root pruning directly next to sidewalks are as follows:
		1. Hand dig a trench six (6) to eight (8) inches in depth at the edge of the planting strip and sidewalk.
		2. Remove all roots less than two (2) inches diameter in this trench back to a desirable lateral root, preserving the root bark ridge. If careful excavation does not reveal a desirable lateral root within twelve (12) inches of the exposed root in question, then the exposed root shall be pruned properly so that a minimal amount of root is removed.
		3. Small root bundles, the source of future sidewalk problems, should also be removed at this time.
		4. All roots between two (2) and four (4) inches in diameter should be examined by the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist in terms of their role in anchoring the tree. a. All roots that contribute significantly to anchorage should be preserved. Remove all other roots in this size range to sound, downward growing lateral roots that are at least one half (½) the size of the root being removed.
		5. All roots larger than four (4) inches in diameter are to be preserved unless their removal is absolutely necessary. Preservation of large roots may require: 1.) reducing the sidewalk width near the root flare; and/or 2) by ramping or bridging the sidewalk over the roots to allow for root growth.
15. Tree guying subsequent to root pruning: Upon review of on-site root pruning and constructing grading limits, the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist shall determine if existing trees subject to root pruning should be guyed or otherwise stabilized. Contractor shall retain a qualified tree service company to complete tree guying and stabilization in accordance with National Arborist Association standards as referenced in Section 5.00. Tree service company shall be certified by the International Society of Consulting Arborists, ISCA.
1. 3.5 Tree Protection Fencing
   1. Tree protection fencing should be installed two as designated on construction documents and at all locations within or adjacent to the project limits where existing trees and landscape material shall remain. Tree protection areas shall be designated on construction documents, and fencing locations should be staked for approval by the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist.
2. Tree protection fences should be:
	1. Galvanized chain-link - six (6) feet in height, or approved equal. Posts should be installed on ten (10) foot centers (maximum), at a depth of three (3) feet minimum. Installation of post shall not result in injury to surface roots or root flares of trees.
	2. Fencing should be installed to completely surround the limits of tree protection areas, and should extend at least ten (10) feet beyond the designated construction limits.
	3. Tree protection fencing shall be installed prior to any site activity and shall remain until its removal is authorized by the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist.
3. Tree Protection Signage:
      1. A sign shall be mounted on tree protection fencing at fifty (50) foot intervals warning constructing personnel and the public to keep out of the tree protection areas.
1. 3.6** **Project Site Monitoring
   1. As determined by the Project Engineer for projects of sufficient size to warrant such, a Project Consulting Arborist should be retained to enforce and monitor the Tree Retention and Protection objectives. The project site should be monitored a minimum of two (2) times weekly-more frequently at the start of the project until all procedures and specifications are understood and properly executed by all parties. Specific monitoring schedules should be developed at preconstruction meetings and modified as deemed necessary by the appropriate parties.
1. 3.7 Injuries to Existing Plants – Damage Penalties
   1. Tree and High Value Shrub Appraisal
	1. All trees and high-value shrubs will evaluated and appraised by the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist, and a list of all tree values for the project will be on file in the Construction Manager's office. Any tree or other plant requiring retention or protection that is not on the list shall be appraised by the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist as necessary to comply with this damage penalty.
		1. Documentation for appraisals will consist of: a. measurement of plant size
		2. Identification by common and botanical names
		3. Current condition (overall health, injuries, overt hazard status, etc.)
		4. Location factors as described in the "Guide for Plant Appraisal". Photographs may be taken of certain trees and shrubs to document debilitating condition factors.
	2. The threshold level for plants to be appraised shall be $100.00; only those trees and shrubs estimated to have a monetary value greater than $100.00 shall be appraised.
	3. Trees and other plants designated as requiring retention or protection shall be identified and located on construction plans. Loss of, or partial injury to, any of these plants due to Contractor neglect or improper construction activities will result in liquidated damages for the assessed value of the tree as determined by the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist.
	4. Trees determined as requiring “general protection” or “special protection” in the construction areas and in other key locations should be clearly identified by the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist. Loss or partial injury to any of these trees due to Contractor neglect or improper construction activities will result in liquidated damages for the assessed value of the trees as determined by the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist. Injury to a portion of these trees will be assessed by the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist and a corresponding portion of the liquidated damages will be assessed to the Contractor.
	5. A fine of one-thousand dollars ($1,000.00) will be levied against the Contractor for each incident of construction damage (including construction traffic) within designated tree protection areas. Any fine shall be independent of any applicable liquidated damages for the assessed value of the tree or tree part.
	6. Trees or roots visibly and unnecessarily injured will cause the Owner to withhold from the Contractor an assessed amount conforming to the requirements stipulated above, for a period of one full year. After that period the impact of the injury to any tree will be assessed by the Project Engineer or the Project Consulting Arborist.
	7. If any trees or shrubs designated to be retained or protected are injured and replacement is justified, a number and equivalent diameter inches of trees or shrubs of same or similar species shall be furnished and planted by the Contractor. The total inch diameter of the replacement plant(s) shall equal the diameter of the plant(s) to be replaced, in accordance with the "Guide for Plant Appraisal".
1. 3.8 Submittals
   1. Proposed methods and schedule for effectuating tree and other plant protection shall be submitted for approval. Contractor shall submit construction schedule which includes a time frame for work near existing plants. Approval of such shall be obtained from the Project Engineer prior to commencement of construction near tree protection areas.
2. Proposed methods, materials, and schedule for root pruning, branch pruning, and other tree maintenance shall be submitted for approval. The Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist shall mark the location of root pruning lines in the field prior to the operation. If possible, root pruning should occur between autumnal leaf fall and spring foliation. Root pruning during the growing season shall require approval of the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist.
1. 3.9 Tree and Other Plant Maintenance During and After Completion of Construction*   1. Proper maintenance should include, but without limitation to:
      1. structural and remedial pruning; watering; mulching; remediating soil compaction; fertilization; insect and disease control; soil and tissue analysis; aeration; and wound treatment. Contractor shall maintain existing trees during and after completion of construction and during the warranty period.
2. The timing duration and frequency of necessary maintenance practices should be determined by the Project Engineer or Project Consulting Arborist, based on factors associated with the site and affected plants.

