---
title: Construction Surveying
section: '017123.16'
divNumb: 1
divName: General Requirements
subgroup: General Requirements
tags: ['General', 'Requirements', 'Construction', 'Surveying']
---

   1. section 01 71 23.16 
   1. Construction Surveying

## General

1. SUMMARY
   1. Work included:
      1. This specification shall outline the responsibility for survey work necessary to construct the work to specified lines and grades and for the maintenance of records to properly determine quantities and develop as-constructed records.
2. Quality Assurance
   1. The survey and staking requirements for a project shall be established and agreed upon by the Contractor, Owner, and Engineer prior to or at the pre-construction meeting.


## Product 

 (Not Used)

## Execution

1. Construction Staking
   1. Engineer’s responsibility:
	1. In general the following construction staking shall be provided by the engineer.
		1. None
2. Contractor responsibility:
	1. In general, the following construction staking is to be provided by the Contractor:
		1. Wastewater collection systems and water distribution systems
			1. Manhole and cleanout centerline stakes.
			2. Offset stakes at manholes for invert grade control to be 25-feet outside manhole.
			3. Offset stakes at manholes for approximate manhole rim elevations.
			4. Location and alignment stakes for service lines.
			5. Regular checks of cover depth for water main installation.
			6. Establishing final finished grades of manholes rings and covers, valve boxes, and other appurtenances.
		2. Water distribution systems
			1. Centerline stakes for alignment
			2. Location stakes for valves, hydrants, and other appurtenances.
			3. Location stakes for service lines
			4. Offset stakes for approximate valve box and hydrant elevations.
1. Quantity Surveys
   1. The Contractor will furnish personnel to assist the Engineer in making such surveys as are necessary to determine the quantities of work performed. Unless waived in writing in each special case, quantity surveys shall be made under the direction of the engineer or his representative. All original field notes, computations and other records taken for the purpose of quantity surveys shall become the property of the Owner and be kept in the custody of the Engineer. Quantity surveys shall be used to the extent necessary in determining the amount of payments due to the contractor.
1. Drawings of Record
   1. Drawings:
	1. The Contractor will be furnished with a complete set of approved prints of all contract drawings upon which the Contractor shall maintain a neat and accurate record of all contract work. 
	2. The Contractor shall promptly record the as-built quantities and dimensions of all contract work as it is performed on this set of prints. 
	3. At the completion of project work, the entire set of prints plus any additional drawings necessary shall be submitted to the Engineer for final inspection and comment. The Contractor shall correct, amplify, and do all other work as may be required by the Engineer to complete the as-built record in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer.
2. Information required:
	1. The Contractor’s record shall include, for example: 
		1. Location of valves, fittings, connections, service lines, cleanouts, and manholes,
			1. Locations are to be established by three point ties to physical objects which will remain undisturbed.
		2. Materials and fittings used; relative placement of fittings, with dimensions,
		3. Depth of water mains, and locations of lines, and 
		4. Other important items.

