---
title: Bonds
section: '017833'
divNumb: 1
divName: General Requirements
subgroup: General Requirements
tags: ['General', 'Requirements', 'Bonds']
---

   1. SECTION 01 78 33& 36
   1. WARRANTIES AND BONDS

## General


* 
	1. RELATED DOCUMENTS
   1. Drawings, General and Special Provisions of the Contract, and other Division 01 Specification
Sections, apply to this Section.
2. SUMMARY
   1. This Section specifies general administrative and procedural requirements for warranties and
bonds required by the Contract Document, including manufacturers' standard warranties on
   1. products and special warranties.
1. Refer to the General Provisions and Special Provisions for terms of the Contractor's
   1. special warranty of workmanship and materials.
2. General closeout requirements are included in Section "Closeout Procedures".
3. Specific requirements for warranties for the Work and products and installations that are
   1. specified to be warranted, are included in the individual Sections of Divisions 02 through
44.
4. Certifications and other commitments and agreements for continuing services to Owner
   1. are specified elsewhere in the Contract Documents.
5. See Section 012300 – Alternates, regarding extension of maintenance period.
   1. Disclaimers and Limitations:
      1. Manufacturer's disclaimers and limitations on product warranties
do not relieve the Contractor of the warranty on the Work that incorporates the products, nor
   1. does it relieve suppliers, manufacturers, and subcontractors required to countersign special
   1. warranties with the Contractor.
3. DEFINITIONS
   1. Standard Product Warranties are preprinted written warranties published by individual
manufacturers for particular products and are specifically endorsed by the manufacturer to the
   1. Owner.
   1. Special Warranties are written warranties required by or incorporated in the Contract
Documents, either to extend time limits provided by standard warranties to provide greater
   1. rights for the Owner.
4. WARRANTY REQUIREMENTS
   1. Related Damages and Losses:
      1. When correcting warranted Work that has failed, remove and
replace other Work that has been damaged as a result of such failure or that must be removed
   1. and replaced to provide access for correction of warranted Work.
   1. Reinstatement of Warranty:
      1. When Work covered by a warranty has failed and been corrected
by replacement or rebuilding, reinstate the warranty by written endorsement. The reinstated
   1. warranty shall be equal to the original warranty with an equitable adjustment for depreciation.
   1. Replacement Cost:
      1. Upon determination that Work covered by a warranty has failed, replace or
rebuild the Work to an acceptable condition complying with requirements of Contract
   1. Documents. The Contractor is responsible for the cost of replacing or rebuilding defective Work
   1. regardless of whether the Owner has benefited from us of the Work through a portion of its
   1. anticipated useful service life.
   1. Owner's Recourse:
      1. Written warranties made to the Owner are in addition to implied warranties,
and shall not limit the duties, obligations, rights and remedies otherwise available under the law,
   1. nor shall warranty periods be interpreted as limitations on time in which the Owner can enforce
   1. such other duties, obligations, rights, or remedies.
1. Rejection of Warranties:
      1. The Owner reserves the right to reject warranties and to limit
   1. selections to products with warranties not in conflict with requirements of the Contract
   1. Documents.
   1. The Owner reserves the right to refuse to accept Work for the Project where a special warranty,
certification, or similar commitment is required on such Work or part of the Work, until
   1. evidence is presented that entities required to countersign such commitments are willing to do
   1. so.
5. SUBMITTALS
   1. Submit written warranties to the Engineer minimum 30 days prior to the date certified for Final
Completion.
1. When a designated portion of the Work is completed and used by the Owner, by separate
   1. agreement with the Contractor during the construction period, submit properly-executed
   1. warranties to the Engineer within fifteen days of completion of that designated portion of
   1. the Work.
   1. When a special warranty is required to be executed by the Contractor, or the Contractor and a
subcontractor, supplier or manufacturer, prepare a written document that contains appropriate
   1. terms and identification, ready for execution by the required parties. Submit a draft to the
   1. Owner through the Engineer for approval prior to final execution.
1. Refer to individual Section of Divisions 02 through 44 for specific content requirements,
   1. and particular requirements for submittal of special warranties.
   1. Form of Submittal:
      1. At Final Completion, submit copies of each required warranty and bond
properly executed by the Contractor, or by the Contractor, subcontractor, supplier, or
   1. manufacturer.
   ## Product (Not Applicable)


## Execution

 (Not Applicable)

