---
title: Fire Retardant Treatment
section: '060573.13'
divNumb: 6
divName: Wood, Plastics, and Composites
subgroup: Facility Construction
tags: ['Facility', 'Construction', 'Wood', 'Plastics', 'Composites', 'Fire', 'Retardant', 'Treatment']
---

         1. 
General
   1. Summary
   1. Refer to Section 018113 – Sustainable Design Requirements; 018113A – Appendix A - Materials Anticipated to be Used for Recycled Content; and 018113B – LEED Matrix for materials requiring contractor validation of recycled content.
   1. environmental considerations
   1. Recommendations:
      1. Choose least toxic treatment (avoids pollution, protects biodiversity).
   1. Choose most durable treatment (conserves resources).
   1. Use smallest possible amount of chemicals (avoids pollution, protects biodiversity, conserves resources).
   1. Use mechanical and other barriers (termite shields, termite mesh, sand barriers) to prevent infestation and reduce the requirement for wood treatment.
   1. environmental quality assurance
   1. If using wood treated with toxic preservatives, such as CCA, ensure that all preservative is adequately fixed in the wood. Reject lumber with surface residues of white salts. Wood that is kiln-dried after treatment and/or prefinished with a sealer is preferable.
   1. references
   1. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)
   1. D3043 - Methods of Testing Structural Panels in Flexure.
   1. American Wood-Preservers' Association (AWPA)
   1. C20 - Structural Lumber - Fire-Retardant Treatment by Pressure Processes.
   1. C27 - Plywood - Fire-Retardant Treatment by Pressure Processes.
   1. Underwriters Laboratories Inc. (UL).
   1. Building Materials Directory.
   1. performance requirements

General
   1. Wood products specified to be fire-retardant-treated:
      1. AWPA C20 for lumber and C27 for plywood, Interior Type A performance rating, including the requirements for moisture content and fire hazard classification test extended to 30 minutes duration.
   1. Wood products used outdoors subject to rainfall:
      1. AWPA C20 and C27 requirements for exterior type.
   1. Listing of formulations per AWPA P-17 is not required.
   1. Structural Lumber and Plywood.
   1. Provide structural lumber and APA-rated plywood which have design values and span ratings based on testing in accordance with ASTM D3043 after conditioning at 150 degrees F and 76 percent relative humidity for 60 days.
   1. Consider design values valid for exposures up to 150 degrees F for lumber and 170 degrees F for plywood.
   1. Finished Surfaces
   1. Provide treatment materials which do not bleed through finished surfaces.
   1. Submittals
   1. Warranty
   1. Submit a statement of compliance with the performance requirements.
   1. quality assurance
   1. Provide treated wood products which bear the classification marking of an approved independent inspection agency having a follow-up inspection service at the treatment plant and the mark of a national evaluation report provided by National Evaluation Service, Inc.
   1. storage and protection
   1. Keep interior fire-retardant-treated wood products dry at all times and ventilated to avoid moisture condensation.
   1. warranty
   1. Special Warranty
   1. Warrant treated plywood roof sheathing to be free of heat degradation for a period of 20 years.
   1. During the warranty period, repair a roof damaged by heat degradation of the treated plywood.
   1. products
   1. materials
   1. Refer to Section 061000 for lumber and plywood.
   1. Treated lumber and plywood:
      1. listed in the UL Building Materials Directory with FR-S designation, or maximum smoke developed rating of 30, kiln dried after treatment.
   1. fabrication
   1. Perform milling parallel to the grain of lumber prior to pressure impregnation. Field cuts across the grain require no further treatment.
   1. execution
   1. installation
   1. Refer to Section 061000.
   1. waste management
   1. Hazardous waste shall be separated, stored, and disposed of according to local regulations.
   1. With wood products and wastes treated with CCA or other compounds containing chromium or arsenic, avoid disposal by incineration.
1. END OF SECTION

