---
title: FUSES
section: '262813'
divNumb: 26
divName: Electrical
subgroup: Facility Services
tags: ['Facility', 'Services', 'Electrical', 'FUSES']
navigation:
  key: FUSES
  parent: Electrical
  order: 2813.0
---

1. SECTION 26 28 13
1. FUSES

General
1. SUMMARY
   1. Section Includes:
      1. Cartridge fuses rated 600-V ac and less for use in enclosed controllers.
2. SUBMITTALS
   1. Product Data:
      1. For each type of product indicated. B. Operation and maintenance data.
3. QUALITY ASSURANCE
   1. Electrical Components, Devices, and Accessories:
      1. Listed and labeled as defined in NFPA 70, by a qualified testing agency, and marked for intended location and application.
   1. Comply with NEMA FU 1 for cartridge fuses. C. Comply with NFPA 70.
Product
1. MANUFACTURERS
   1. Manufacturers:
      1. Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:
      1. Cooper Bussmann, Inc.
2. Edison Fuse, Inc.
3. Ferraz Shawmut, Inc.
4. Littelfuse, Inc.
2. CARTRIDGE FUSES
   1. Characteristics:
      1. NEMA FU 1, nonrenewable cartridge fuses with voltage ratings consistent with circuit voltages.
3. Fuses, 600 volts and less, shall meet the following criteria:
      1. A. Be of the same manufacturer.
   1. Fuses rated 1/10 to 600 amperes shall be current limiting UL Class RK1 with time delay. Time delay should be at least 10 seconds at 500% of rated amperes.
   1. Fuses rated 601 to 6000 amperes shall be UL Class L with time delay. Time for fuse to open shall be at least 4 seconds at 500% of rated amperes.
   1. Motor circuit fuses rated 1/10 to 600 amperes should be sized at 175% of the motor nameplate
FLA or the next standard size unless otherwise directed by the equipment manufacturer.
   1. Motor circuit fuses rated 601 to 6000 amperes shall be sized between 150% and 175% of motor nameplate FLA or the next size larger.
   1. Provide one spare set of three of each size and type of fuse rated at more than 600 amperes, and 10% of each size and type of fuse rated 600 amperes or less, but in no case less than one set of three of each size.
   1. Provide a cabinet of adequate dimensions to store the specified spare fuses. Cabinet shall be of panelboard type construction, having separate labeled compartments for each fuse class and rating. Install the cabinet where indicated on the Drawings or as directed by the Architect.
   1. Fuses for Fluorescent Lamp Ballasts:
      1. Bussman Type GLR with Type HLR fuseholder. 
Execution
1. FUSE APPLICATIONS
   1. Motor Branch Circuits:
      1. Class RK1, time delay. B. Control Circuits:
      1. Class CC, time delay.
2. INSTALLATION
   1. Install fuses in fusible devices. Arrange fuses so rating information is readable without removing fuse.
3. IDENTIFICATION
   1. Install labels complying with requirements for identification specified in Division 26 Section "Identification for Electrical Systems" and indicating fuse replacement information on inside door of each fused switch and adjacent to each fuse block and holder.
END OF SECTION 26 28 13

