---
title: Loading Dock Levelers
section: '111319.13'
divNumb: 11
divName: Equipment
subgroup: Facility Construction
tags: ['Facility', 'Construction', 'Equipment', 'Loading', 'Dock', 'Levelers']
---


## General

   1. summary
   1. Refer to Section 018113 – Sustainable Design Requirements; 018113A – Appendix A - Materials Anticipated to be Used for Recycled Content; and 018113B – LEED Matrix for materials requiring contractor validation of recycled content.
   1. References
   1. American National Standards Institute, Inc. (ANSI)
   1. MH30.1 - Specifications for Safety, Performance, and Testing of Dock Leveling Devices.
   1. system description
   1. Comply with ANSI MH30.1 and the following:
      1. Size:
         1. 6'-0" wide x 6'-0" long
   1. Travel:
      1. 12” above to 12” below dock level
   1. Tilt Adjustment:
      1. 4” minimum
   1. Electrical service:
      1. 480 volt, 3 phase, 60 hertz
   1. Submittals
   1. Shop Drawings
   1. Submit Shop Drawings showing layout and details of fabrication and installation.
   1. Maintenance Instructions
   1. Submit maintenance instructions for finished materials and operating and maintenance instructions for equipment.
   1. project conditions
   1. Field Measurements
   1. Take field measurements to verify or supplement dimensions indicated. Be responsible for accurate fit of Work.
   1. products
   1. Manufacturers
   1. Autoquip Corp., Blue Giant USA Corp.; Kelley Dock Systems; W.B. McGuire Co.; Rite-Hite Corp.; Systems, Inc. Model HD 2166; or as approved.
   1. Construction
   1. Platform
   1. Frame:
      1. structural steel framework and a box type hinge angle assembly designed to recess one inch behind the front of the dock wall and have a maximum gap of 3/4 inch between the hinge and the pit curb angle.
   1. Top plate:
      1. checkered steel reinforced with heavy structural members rigidly welded to the top plate with full operating range toe guards fastened on each side.
   1. Provide lip with chamfered edge and projecting a minimum of 11 inches past the face of the bumpers, only during the operating cycle or when it is supported by the carrier bed. Provide lip and hinge of sufficient strength to support the full capacity of the dock leveler without support arms or other additional support.
   1. Hydraulic Jack Units
   1. Provide hydraulic jack units as required for raising the dock leveler and extending the lip.
   1. Pistons:
      1. accurately turned steel pipe with a fine grind surface finish, guided by two widely spaced guide bearings and provided with a means to prevent piston from leaving the cylinder.
   1. Cylinders:
      1. of the proper size, construction and strength for the application, complete with removable, automatically adjusting packing ring, a wiping ring, piping and connections, and other parts necessary for a complete installation.
   1. Supported with structural steel members extending across the full width of the pit and anchored to the pit floor to provide adequate rigidity and support for the load involved.
   1. Power Unit
   1. Combination electric power unit and hydraulic oil tank assembly which includes all piping and is bench wired to a terminal strip inside a galvanized steel or aluminum junction box.
   1. Include a totally enclosed, ball bearing, induction motor connected directly to a suitable hydraulic pump, combination main switch and magnetic starter, 480-volt to 120-volt control transformer, solenoid valve, check valve, and other components required for a completely operative assembly.
   1. Design the power unit assembly to be installed in the pit under the dock leveler platform and provide necessary hydraulic oil.
   1. Service to the power unit is specified in Division 16.
   1. Safety Devices
   1. Equip each hydraulic cylinder with a safety orifice to automatically restrict the return oil flow so that the broken line lowering speed does not exceed the normal lowering speed.
   1. Provide an emergency stop mechanism designed to operate when a carrier pulls away while the dock leveler and load are resting on it, allowing the lip to drop to pendant position but preventing the loaded platform from falling more than 3 inches before being stopped and held by the safety mechanism. Design the emergency stop mechanism to stop off-centered loads.
   1. Shop Painting
   1. Apply one shop coat of approved paint to metal surfaces, except working parts, curb angle assemblies, and metal components of the rubber bumpers.
   1. Operation And Control
   1. Operation
   1. Constant pressure on the up push button causes the platform to travel to the full up position. When the platform reaches the full up position, the lip is hydraulically extended to the working position. Constant pressure on the push button in the up cycle after the lip has extended shall not damage the equipment. The hydraulic fluid by-passes the cylinders thru an integral relief valve in the pumping unit. When the push button is released, the platform lowers until the lip rests on the carrier. When the carrier pulls away, the lip automatically drops to the pendant position and the platform returns to the dock level from any position.
   1. Control Station
   1. Rite-Hite “DOK Commander” combination control panel to incorporate overhead door, push buttons, dock leveler, vehicle restraint, and dock light.
   1. Electric Interlock
   1. If the dock leveler is located under an exterior door, electrically interlock it with the door to prevent operation unless the door is in the full open position.
   1. dock bumpers
   1. Provide 20-inch-long by 10-1/2-inch-wide loading dock bumpers, 4 inches thick.

“DOKSaver Dock Bumper” by Rite-Hite; or as approved.
   1. execution
   1. preparation
   1. Protection
   1. Protect the Work and adjacent construction against damage.
   1. Installation

## General

   1. Install dock leveler in strict accordance with manufacturer's printed instructions and approved Shop Drawings.
   1. Furnish anchor bolts, hex nuts and related components.
   1. Embedded Items
   1. Install items embedded in concrete in accordance with dock leveler manufacturer's certified pit drawings.
   1. Bumper Pads
   1. Mount pads on surface of concrete wall at dock, properly positioned and aligned in relationship to adjacent construction.
   1. Cleaning
   1. Upon completion, clean the Work in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
1. END OF SECTIONTHIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY BLANK

