---
title: Static-Control Resilient Flooring
section: '096536'
divNumb: 9
divName: Finishes
subgroup: Facility Construction
tags: ['Facility', 'Construction', 'Finishes', 'Static-Control', 'Resilient', 'Flooring']
---


## General

   1. SUMMARY
   1. Section includes requirements for static-dissipative resilient tile flooring with cold-welded seams.
   1. References
   1. American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM)
   1. E648 - Test Method for Critical Radiant Flux of Floor-Covering Systems Using a Radiant Heat Energy Source.
   1. E662 - Test Method for Specific Optical Density of Smoke Generated by Solid Materials.
   1. F150 – Standard Test Method for Electrical Resistance of Conductive and Static Dissipative Resilient Flooring.
   1. E-595 – Standard Test Method for Total Mass Loss and Collected Volatile Condensable Materials from Outgassing in a Vacuum Environment.
   1. F710 - Practice for Preparing Concrete Floors and Other Monolithic Floors to Receive Resilient Flooring.
   1. F970 – Test Method for Static Load Limit
   1. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
   1. NFPA 253-1897 Test Method for Critical Radiant Flux of Floor Covering Systems Using a Radiant Energy Source.
   1. NFPA 258-1989 Test Method for Specific Density of Smoke Generated by Solid Materials.
   1. related sections
   1. Division 9 Section – Resilient Base and Accessories
   1. Division 26 - Electrical
   1. Submittals
   1. Product Data:
      1. For each type of product indicated.
   1. Samples for Initial Selection:
      1. For each type of floor covering and exposed accessory indicated.
   1. Samples for Verification:
      1. For each type of floor covering indicated and of size indicated below:
      1. Tile:
         1. 300 x 300 mm (12 x 12 inches) minimum size.
   1. Accessories:
      1. In length equal to length of floor covering samples.
   1. Seam Samples:
      1. For seamless installation technique indicated and for each flooring product, color, and pattern required with seam running lengthwise and in center of 120 x 230 mm (6” x 9”). Sample applied to a rigid backing and prepared by Installer for this Project.
   1. Qualification Data:
      1. For Installer
   1. Product Test Reports:
      1. Based on evaluation of comprehensive tests performed by a qualified testing agency, for floor coverings.
   1. Maintenance Data:
      1. For floor coverings to include in maintenance manuals.
   1. Quality Assurance
   1. Installer Qualifications:
      1. A qualified installer who employs workers for this Project that are competent in techniques required by manufacturer for static-control floor covering installation and seaming method indicated.
   1. Engage an installer who employs workers for this project that are trained or certified by floor covering manufacturer for installation techniques required.
   1. Fire-Performance Characteristics:
      1. Provide products identical to those tested for fire-exposure behavior per test method indicated by a testing and inspecting agency acceptable to authorities having jurisdiction.
   1. Critical Radiant Flux Classification:
      1. Class I, not less than 0.45 W/sq. cm per ASTM E648.
   1. Smoke Density = Less than 450 per ASTM E 662.
   1. Static-Control Properties:
      1. Provide floor coverings with static-control properties indicated as determined by testing identical products per test method indicated by an independent testing and inspecting agency.
   1. Preinstallation Conference:
      1. Conduct conference at Project site to comply with requirements in Division 1 Section “Project Management and Coordination”.
   1. Conduct conference with attendance and participation of manufacturer’s representative.
   1. Delivery, Storage and Handling
   1. Store floor coverings and installation materials in dry spaces protected from the weather, with ambient temperatures maintained within range recommended by manufacturer but not less than 50 deg F (10 deg C) or more than 90 deg F (32 deg C).
   1. Floor Tile:
      1. Store on flat surfaces.
   1. project Conditions
   1. Maintain temperatures within range recommended by manufacturer, but not less than 68 deg F (20 deg C) or more than 85 deg F (29 deg C), in spaces to receive floor coverings for at least 72 hours before and during installation and after installation unless manufacturers written recommendations specify a longer time period.
   1. After post-installation period, maintain temperatures within range recommended by manufacturer.
   1. Close spaces to traffic during floor covering installation.
   1. Close spaces to traffic for 48 hours after floor covering installation.
   1. Install floor coverings after other finishing operations, including painting and ceiling operations have been completed.
   1. Do not install tile flooring over concrete substrates until substrates have cured and are dry to bond adhesive as determined by resilient flooring manufacturers recommended bond and moisture tests.
   1. EXTRA MATERIALS
   1. Furnish extra materials described below that match products installed and that are packaged with protective covering for storage and identified with labels describing contents.
   1. Products
   1. materials
   1. Specification is based on Norament System, 928 al S grano tile 39.37” x 39.37” x 0.14” thick as manufactured by Freudenberg building Systems, Lawrence, MA. Equal products by one of the following are acceptable:
      1. AB ElectroStatic, American Biltrite (Canada) Ltd.
   1. Forbo Industries, Inc.
   1. Marley Flexco (USA), Inc.
   1. VPI, LLC, Floor Product Division
   1. Properties:
      1. Electrical Resistance:
         1. Test per ASTM F, ESD S7.1
   1. Resistance to Ground 106 – 9 x 108 ohms.
   1. Surface resistance 106 – 9 x 108 ohms.
   1. Static Generation:
      1. Less than 10 V when tested per ESD STM 97.2, with conductive shoes.
   1. Static Decay:
      1. 5000 to 50 V in less than 0.1 seconds when tested per FED-STD-101/4046.1.
   1. Static Load Limit:
      1. 1,500 pounds per square inch when tested per ASTM F970.
   1. Rolling Load:
      1. 850 pounds per square inch.
   1. Outgassing:
      1. VCM less than 1.2% when tested in accordance with ASTM E-595.
   1. Color:
      1. As scheduled in Finish List.
   1. Installation Materials
   1. Trowelable Leveling and Patching Compounds:
      1. Latex-modified, Portland cement, or blended hydraulic cement based formulation provided or approved by floor covering manufacturer for applications indicated.
   1. Static-Control Adhesive:
      1. Adhesive product of floor covering manufacturer that produces conductive continuity of floor covering system. Norament PU Adhesive 314 or equal.
   1. Grounding Strips:
      1. 1/2” wide copper foil provided and approved by floor covering manufacturer and that produce conductive continuity of floor covering system to ground connection.
   1. Seamless-Installation Accessories:
      1. Cold-Welding Compound:
         1. Norament cold-weld compound, or product required by flooring manufacturer to provide seamless installation.
   1. Color:
      1. Match floor color.
   1. Execution
   1. examination
   1. Examine substrates with Installer and manufacturers representative present, for compliance with requirements for installation tolerances, moisture content, and other conditions affecting performance.
   1. Verify that finishes of substrates comply with tolerances and other requirements specified in other Sections and that substrates are free of cracks, ridges, depressions, scale, and foreign deposits that might interfere with adhesion or static-control characteristics of floor coverings.
   1. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected.
   1. preparation
   1. Preparing substrates according to manufacturer's written recommendation and with oversight by manufacturers representative to ensure adhesion of floor coverings and conductive continuity of floor covering systems.
   1. Concrete Substrates:
      1. Prepare concrete slabs according to ASTM F 710.
   1. Verify that substrates are dry and free of curing compounds, sealers, and hardeners. Remove substrate coatings and other substances that are incompatible with floor covering adhesives and that contain soap, wax, oil or silicone, using mechanical methods recommended by manufacturer Do not use solvents.
   1. Alkanity and Adhesion Testing:
      1. Perform tests recommended by manufacturer.
   1. Moisture Testing:
      1. Perform anhydrous calcium chloride test, ASTM F1869. Proceed with installation only after substrates have maximum moisture-vapor-emission rate of 1.36 kg of water/92.9 sq. m (3 lb of water/1000 sq. foot) in 24 hours.
   1. Perform tests recommended by manufacturer. Proceed with installation only after substrates pass testing.
   1. Use trowelable leveling and patching compounds to fill cracks, holes, and depressions in substrates.
   1. Move floor coverings and installation materials into spaces where they will be installed at least 72 hours in advance of installation.
   1. Do not install floor coverings until they are same temperature as space where they are to be installed.
   1. Broom and vacuum clean substrates to be covered by floor coverings immediately before installation. After cleaning, examine substrates for moisture, alkaline salts, carbonation, and dust. Proceed with installation only after unsatisfactory conditions have been corrected.
   1. Installation, General
   1. Arrange for manufacturers representative to oversee installation of static-control resilient floor coverings.
   1. Embed grounding strips in static-control adhesive. Extend strips beyond perimeter of static-control resilient floor covering surfaces to ground points. Provide minimum of one ground point per room, but no less than one per 2000 square feet.
   1. Scribe and cut floor coverings to butt neatly and tightly to vertical surfaces, permanent fixtures, and built-in furniture including cabinets, pipes, outlets, edging, thresholds, and nosings.
   1. Extend floor covering below casework and built-in furniture.
   1. Extend floor coverings into toe spaces, door reveals, closets and similar openings.
   1. Maintain reference markers, holes, or openings that are in place or marked for future cutting by repeating on floor coverings as marked on substrates. Use chalk or other nonpermanent-marking device.
   1. Install floor coverings on covers for telephone and electrical ducts, and similar items in installation areas. Maintain overall continuity of color and pattern with pieces of floor coverings installed on covers. Tightly adhere floor-covering edges to substrates that abut covers and to cover perimeters.
   1. Adhere floor coverings to substrates using a full spread of adhesive applied to substrate to produce a completed installation without open cracks, voids, raising and puckering at joints, telegraphing of adhesive spreader marks, and other surface imperfections.
   1. Seamless Installation:
      1. Rout joints and weld with compound to permanently fuse sections into a seamless floor covering. Prepare, weld, and finish seams to produce surfaces flush with adjoining floor covering surfaces.
   1. Follow manufacturer’s instructions.
   1. Tile installation
   1. Lay out tiles from center marks established with principal walls, discounting minor offsets, so tiles at opposite edges of room are of equal width. Adjust as necessary to avoid using cut widths that equal less than one-half tile at perimeter.
   1. Lay tiles square with room axis.
   1. Match tiles for color and pattern by selecting tiles from cartons in same sequence as manufactured and packaged, if so numbered. Discard broken, cracked, chipped, or deformed tiles.
   1. Lay static-dissipative tile with grain direction alternating in adjacent tiles (basket-weave pattern).
   1. Adhesive Material Installation:
      1. Use trowel as recommended by tile manufacturer for specific type of adhesive. Spread at a rate as recommended by tile manufacturer.
   1. Field quality control
   1. Testing:
      1. Owner will engage a qualified independent testing and inspecting agency to test electrical resistance of static-control resilient floor covering systems for compliance with requirements.
   1. Arrange for testing after installation adhesives have fully cured and floor covering systems have stabilized to ambient conditions.
   1. Arrange for testing of floor coverings before performing polish procedures.
   1. Remove and replace static-control floor covering where test results indicate that they do not comply with specified requirements.
   1. Additional testing and inspecting, at Contractor’s expense, will be performed to determine compliance of replaced or additional work with specified requirements.
   1. Cleaning and protection
   1. Perform the following operations immediately after completing floor covering installation:
      1. Remove adhesive and other surface blemishes from floor covering surfaces.
   1. Sweep and vacuum floor coverings thoroughly.
   1. Damp mop floor coverings to remove marks and soils.
   1. Do not wash floor coverings until after time period recommended by manufacturer.
   1. Protect floor coverings from mars, marks, indentations, and other damage from construction operations and placement f equipment and fixtures during remainder of construction period. Use protection methods indicated or recommended in writing by manufacturer.
   1. Do not wax static control resilient floor coverings.
   1. Cover floor coverings with undyed, untreated building paper until Substantial Completion.
   1. Do not move heavy and sharp objects directly over floor coverings. Place plywood or hardboard panels over floor coverings and under objects while they are being moved. Slide or roll objects over panels without moving panels.
1. END OF SECTION** 

