---
title: Metal Canopies
section: '107316.13'
divNumb: 10
divName: Specialties
subgroup: Facility Construction
tags: ['Facility', 'Construction', 'Specialties', 'Metal', 'Canopies']
---

1. SECTION 10 73 16.13
1. METAL CANOPIES

## General

1. RELATED DOCUMENTS
   1. Drawings, General and Special Provisions of the Contract, and Division 01 Specification Sections, apply to this Section.
2. SUMMARY
   1. This Section includes design, fabrication, and erection of two freestanding, pre-engineered metal canopies with integral base attachments to cast-in-place reinforced concrete foundation, steel framing, metal roof, roof edge gutters and leaders, vertical fascia and metal ceiling.
   1. Related Sections include the following:
      1. Division 5 Section "Metal Fabrications".
3. PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
   1. Cooperate with regulatory agency or authority and provide data as requested by authority having jurisdiction.
   1. Structural Performance:
      1. Provide pre-engineered metal canopies capable of withstanding the effects of gravity loads and the following loads and stresses within limits and under conditions indicated:
      1. Wind Loads:
         1. Determine loads based on the following minimum design wind pressures:
      1. Uniform pressure of 50 lbf/sq. ft. acting inward or outward.
2. Snow Loads:
      1. 50 lbf/sq. ft.
3. Canopy Over Blowers:
      1. 6-inch air piping and silencers with a weight of approximately
   1. 500 lb supported from ceiling, 28 locations (including future blower piping locations) as shown on the Drawing No. M-22.
   1. Seismic Performance:
      1. Provide pre-engineered metal canopies capable of withstanding the effects of earthquake motions determined according to ASCE 7, "Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures":
      1. Section 9, "Earthquake Loads."
   1. Thermal Movements:
      1. Provide pre-engineered metal canopies that allows for thermal movements resulting from the following maximum change (range) in ambient and surface temperatures by preventing buckling, opening of joints, overstressing of components, failure of joint sealants, failure of connections, and other detrimental effects. Base engineering
calculation on surface temperatures of materials due to both solar heat gain and nighttime-sky heat loss.
1. Temperature Change (Range):
      1. 120 deg F, ambient; 180 deg F, material surfaces.
4. SUBMITTALS
   1. Product Data:
      1. Include construction details, material descriptions, dimensions of individual components and profiles, and finishes for pre-engineered metal canopies.
   1. Shop Drawings:
      1. Include plans, elevations, sections, details, and attachments to other work.
Canopy supplier to furnish complete canopy drawings signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in Oklahoma.
   1. Samples for Initial Selection:
      1. For each finish product specified, two complete sets of color chips representing manufacturer's full range of available colors and patterns.
   1. Warranty.
5. QUALITY ASSURANCE
   1. Source Limitations:
      1. Obtain pre-engineered metal canopies through one source from a single manufacturer who will manufacture and provide both post-installation inspection and installation inspection report.
   1. Manufacturer Qualifications:
      1. Company specializing in manufacturing prefabricated structures and shelters with a minimum documented experience of five years.
   1. Welding:
      1. Qualify procedures and personnel according to the following:
      1. All welding shall be in accordance with ANSI/AWS D1.1, "Structural Welding Code- Steel” (with E70XX Electrodes).
2. All structural shop welding shall be done by certified welders.
3. Steel shop connections will be welded and field connections will be bolted.
4. All slag shall be cleaned from all welds and inspected.
6. WARRANTY
   1. Provide a 20-year warranty against peeling, flaking, and chipping of structure, deck, and fascia.
7. DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING
   1. Store products in manufacturer's unopened packaging until ready for installation.
   1. Protect all components and accessories from corrosion, deformation, damage and deterioration when stored at job site. Keep materials free from dirt and foreign matter.

## Product

1. MANUFACTURERS
   1. Basis of Design:
      1. AustinMohawk and Company, Inc., 2175 Beechgrove Place, Utica, New York
13501; Phone: 1-800-765-3110; Fax: 315-793-9370. Email: infoaustinmohawkcom; Website:
      1. [www.austinmohawk.com](http://www.austinmohawk.com/)
   1. Approved equal.
2. MATERIALS A. Structural Steel:
      1. All material and work shall conform to the latest AISC Specifications for Design, Fabrication, and Erection of Structural Steel for Buildings.
2. Wide flange I beam:
      1. Shall conform to ASTM A572 GR.50, Fy= 50 ksi. Other rolled sections shall conform to ASTM A36, Fy= 36 ksi.
3. Square and rectangular tubing:
      1. Shall conform to ASTM A500, Grade B, Fy= 46 ksi.
4. Plate Steel:
      1. Shall Conform to ASTM A36, Fy= 36 ksi
5. All structural steel shall be hot-dip galvanized per ASTM A123/ A123M. B. Sheet Metal:
      1. Decking:
      1. ASTM A653 galvanized steel (G90) with baked enamel finish. Depth and gauge to satisfy specified loads.
2. Perimeter Gutter:
      1. 20 gauge hot dipped galvanized steel with baked enamel finish.
3. External downspouts:
      1. 3" × 4" × 24 gauge hot-dipped galvanized steel with baked enamel finish.
   1. Anchor Bolts:
      1. Provide stainless steel expansion anchors of size and embedment depth required by applied loads.
   1. Canopy Fascia:
      1. 2-inch Laminated Foam Core Fascia:
         1. Panel face and backing shall be 24 gauge hot- dipped galvanized steel with a baked enamel finish. The foam core shall be
   1. 2"- 1# expanded virgin polystyrene.
   1. Ceiling:
      1. Interior ceiling, foam core panel system providing smooth flat interior. Fabricate of
   1. 24 gauge prefinished steel painted with expanded polystyrene core. F. Shrinkage-Resistant Grout:
         1. ASTM C 1107, factory-packaged, aggregate grout, non-corrosive, non-staining, mixed with water to consistency suitable for application.
3. PRE-ENGINEERED METAL CANOPY, GENERAL

## General

:
      1. Provide a complete, integrated set of manufacturer's standard**,** mutually dependent components that form a completely pre-engineered canopy, ready for construction on Project site. Pre-engineered metal canopies shall be capable of withstanding structural and other loads indicated, thermally induced movement, and exposure to weather without failure or infiltration of water.
4. PRE-ENGINEERED METAL CANOPY A. Canopy Over Blowers
1. Size:
      1. 28'-6" W × 62'-6" L
2. Number of columns:
      1. 6, Clearance:
      1. 18'-0"
3. Column Spacings:
   1. Width:
      1. 4'/20'-6"/4' , Length:
      1. 4'/27'-3"/27'-3"/4'
4. Roof Slope:
      1. 1/4" per foot
5. Fascia: Height: 36", Style:
   1. ACM, Sides:
      1. 2, Ends:
      1. 2
   1. Canopy Over UV Disinfection Equipment
1. Size:
      1. 22'-0" W × 37'-0" L
2. Number of columns:
   1. 2, Clearance:
      1. 15'-0", Burial Depth:
      1. 1'-0"
3. Column Spacings:
   1. Width:
      1. 11'-11', Length:
      1. 4'-29'-4'
4. Roof Slope:
      1. 1/4" per foot
5. Fascia: Height: 36", Style:
   1. ACM, Sides:
      1. 2, Ends:
      1. 2
5. FINISHES
   1. Comply with National Association of Architectural Metal Manufacturers (NAAMM) "Metal Finishes Manual for Architectural and Metal Products" for recommendations for applying and designating finishes.
   1. Appearance of Finished Work:
      1. Variations in appearance of abutting or adjacent pieces are acceptable if they are within one-half of the range of approved Samples. Noticeable variations in the same piece are not acceptable. Variations in appearance of other components are acceptable if they are within the range of approved Samples and are assembled or installed to minimize contrast.
   1. Execution
1. INSTALLATION
   1. Install anchor bolts as required for column base plates.
   1. Set pre-engineered metal canopy plumb and aligned. Level base plates true to plane on shims allowing for 1½" of grout.
   1. Fasten pre-engineered metal canopy columns to anchor bolts. After canopy is completely installed and plumb fully grout baseplates. Provide concrete pavement over foundation column to match adjacent slab.
   1. Bolted Connections:
      1. All structural erection bolts to conform to ASTM A325
2. A minimum diameter of 3/4-inch erection bolts shall be used for crossbeam-to-column connections and a minimum of 5/8-inch diameter bolts for all other connections.
3. All drilled holes in structural steel shall be deburred.
4. Flat structural washers (minimum of one) shall be used on all bolted connections.
5. All bolts shall be tightened using AISC turn-of-the-nut method (unless otherwise specified).
   1. Screws:
      1. Fastening shall be performed per installation prints provided by the manufacturer.
2. Installation screws shall be furnished with electrode deposited cadmium coating unless otherwise noted.
3. Self-drilling and self-tapping screws shall have a sufficient cut point and a 1/2-inch O.D. dished tapping metal backed neoprene washer.
   1. After completing installation, inspect exposed finishes and repair damaged finishes. END OF SECTION 105300
