---
title: Loading Dock Truck Restraints
section: '111319.33'
divNumb: 11
divName: Equipment
subgroup: Facility Construction
tags: ['Facility', 'Construction', 'Equipment', 'Loading', 'Dock', 'Truck', 'Restraints']
---


General
   1. References
   1. National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA)
   1. MG 1 - Motors and Generators.
   1. National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
   1. 70 - National Electrical Code.
   1. Submittals
   1. Shop Drawings
   1. Submit the following Shop Drawings:
      1. Complete dimensioned drawings of the equipment in plan and elevation showing major components, space requirements and reactions at points of supports.
   1. Schematic piping drawing of hydraulic system.
   1. Cuts or drawings of operating devices.
   1. Wiring diagrams of power, control and safety devices.
   1. Operating and Maintenance Instructions
   1. Upon completion of the installation, submit 3 copies of an instruction manual containing the following:
      1. Complete operating instructions.
   1. Complete cataloged list of component parts of the system.
   1. Complete instructions for carrying out repairs and replacement of parts.
   1. Complete wiring and schematic diagrams.
   1. Recommended preventive maintenance program.
   1. quality assurance
   1. Regulatory Requirements
   1. Design and construct motors in accordance with NEMA MG 1.
   1. Provide electrical work and equipment which complies with NFPA 70, unless otherwise specified herein.
   1. project conditions
   1. Field Measurements
   1. Take field measurements to verify or supplement the dimensions indicated.
   1. products
   1. Retention Units And Accessories
   1. Manufacture
   1. RHR-600 Truck restraining device by Rite-Hite Corp. "Dok-Lok", or as approved.
   1. Truck restraining device shall be manufactured by the same manufacturer as the dock leveler.
   1. Integration with Dock Levelers
   1. Provide units which are suitable for integrated operation with the dock levelers being provided under another Section.
   1. Retention Units
   1. Provide units which consist of a spring-loaded carriage assembly anchored to a steel face plate embedded in the concrete of the dock face.
   1. Design carriage assembly to automatically move downward on the guides on the steel face plate when contacted by the ICC bar on a trailer, allowing trailer to back into contact with dock face. Provide assembly which contains a power-operated hook mechanism which, when activated will rise out of the assembly and lock over the ICC bar.
   1. Design steel face plate, complete with anchorage into concrete, as required to comply with the retention strength specified. Face plate may be provided as an integral assembly with the leveler pit curb angles if same as manufacturer's standard.
   1. Provide complete units which, when locked in position over an ICC bar, have a retention strength of 18,000 pounds.
   1. Accessories
   1. Provide each unit complete with the following accessories:
      1. Two wall-mounted signs reading "caution-back in or pull out on green only", with mounting arrangement:
         1. one sign shall read forward and one backward to be read in the truck rear-view mirror.
   1. Two sets of red and green lights, with flashing control.
   1. One interior push button station, Rite-Hite “DOK-Commander” combination control panel, refer to Section 11162, Truck Restraints, Control Stations.
   1. A warning horn signal.
   1. Motor of adequate capacity to position the hook 1/6 hp minimum).
   1. Provide electrical components which are suitable for operation on 110-volt, 1 phase, service, with control wiring at 24 volts.
   1. Operating Sequence
   1. When no trailer is at the dock, or if a trailer is at the dock but retention system is not activated, the light mounted on exterior between the illuminated signs will be flashing green and the interior light will be flashing red.
   1. When a trailer is backed into dock, the trailer ICC bar will contact the spring-loaded carriage assembly, forcing it down to clear the ICC bar. Carriage will automatically position under and in contact with the ICC bar.
   1. When trailer is positioned, the dock attendant will press the "raise" pushbutton, activating the hook of the carriage assembly, which rises up out of the assembly and locks on the trailer ICC bar. When the hook starts to rise out of the assembly the lights will automatically reverse, with the exterior light flashing red as a warning to the driver that the truck cannot leave the dock and the interior flashing green to indicate that loading or unloading operations may safely begin.
   1. Hook should remain locked over the ICC bar until trailer is ready to leave, at which time the dock attendant presses the "lower" button, disengaging the hook and reversing the lights to green exterior and red interior.
   1. If the trailer is not equipped with an ICC bar, when the hook is activated and cannot engage, the hook will swing to a vertical position, the warning horn will sound and the lights will reverse to red on interior and green on exterior. Similarly, if the trailer has an ICC bar of size or location which will not allow the hook to engage, the carriage assembly will stall and the horn will sound and lights reverse as above.
   1. execution
   1. preparation
   1. Protection
   1. Protect the Work and adjacent construction against damage.
   1. Installation

General
   1. Install the work in accordance with manufacturer's instructions and approved Shop Drawings.
   1. Face Plate
   1. Deliver face plate with anchors to site in ample time for building into concrete work.
   1. Build face plate into concrete in proper relationship to the curb angle assembly, flush, plumb and square
   1. Carriage Assembly
   1. Attach carriage assembly to face plate by welding, accurately located on center of dock width.
   1. Electrical
   1. After electrical equipment is installed and wiring and power connection are completed, test operate each unit to prove compliance with requirements. Adjust components as necessary for proper operation.
   1. Electrical conduit and wiring between components, and connection to power source, will be provided under Division 26.
   1. Cleaning
   1. Upon completion, clean the Work in accordance with manufacturers instructions.
1. END OF SECTIONTHIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY BLANK

