---
title: Spreading and Grading Topsoil
section: '312219.13'
divNumb: 31
divName: Earthwork
subgroup: Site and Infrastructure
tags: ['Site', 'Infrastructure', 'Earthwork', 'Spreading', 'Grading', 'Topsoil']
navigation:
  key: Spreading and Grading Topsoil
  parent: Earthwork
  order: 2219.13
---

1. SECTION 02920
1. TOPSOIL

– GENERAL
   1. RELATED DOCUMENTS :
      1. The General Contract Conditions, Drawings and other Division - 1 Specification sections apply to Work of this section.
   1. DESCRIPTION :
      1. The work of this section consists of furnishing, stockpiling and placing topsoil on a previously prepared subgrade.
   1. RELATED WORK
   1. Section 02100 – Site Preparation
   1. Section 02200 - Earthwork
   1. Section 02260 – Fine Grading
   1. Section 02920 – Soil Preparation
   1. Section 02933 – Native Grass Seeding
   1. QUALITY ASSUARANCE:
      1. Contractor shall submit soil analysis report for imported topsoil to the State University Agricultural Extension Service or other approved soil testing laboratory. Report shall cover soil textural classification (percentages of sand, silt, and clay), pH and include additive recommendations. Testing will be at the expense of the Contractor. Contractor to amend topsoil per test recommendations with approval of Owner's Representative.
   1. DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING:
      1. Do not deliver or place topsoil in frozen, wet, or muddy condition.
  1. PRODUCTS
   1. ON-SITE TOPSOIL :
      1. Topsoil previously stripped and stockpiled under Section 02100.
   1. IMPORTED TOPSOIL
   1. All topsoil shall be a loam or sandy loam. At least 10 days prior to topsoil delivery, notify Owner’s Representative of the source(s) from which topsoil is to be furnished. Topsoil shall be furnished by the Contractor and shall be a natural, friable soil representative of productive soils in the vicinity. It shall be obtained from the top 6" of well drained areas.
   1. Fertile, friable, loamy soil, reasonably free from subsoil, refuse, roots, heavy or stiff clay, stones larger than 1 inch, coarse sand, noxious seeds, sticks, brush, litter, and other deleterious substances; suitable for the germination of seeds and the support of vegetative growth. The pH value shall be between 7.0 and 8.0 and the total salts maximum content shall be 3 MMHOS/CM.
   1. Soil Texture:
      1. Sand, 30 to 50 percent; silt, 30 to 50 percent; clay, 5 to 30 percent.
   1. Additives:
      1. As determined by soil fertility tests. % Organic Content:
      1. 2.9% minimum.
    1. EXECUTION
   1. PLACING TOPSOIL
   1. Native Grass and Turfgrass Areas:
      1. Scarify compacted subgrade to a 6-inch depth to bond topsoil to subsoil. Place topsoil to a minimum depth of 3-inches after settlement. Topsoil shall be free from weeds, sod, clods and stones larger than 1-inch, toxic substances, litter or other deleterious material. Spread evenly and grade to elevations and slopes shown. Hand rake areas inaccessible to machine grading.
   1. Trees, Shrubs, Perennial and Annual Beds:
      1. Scarify compacted subgrade to a 12-inch depth to bond topsoil to subsoil. Fully amend subgrade with 2/3rds topsoil and 1/3rd well rotted manure fertilizer. Topsoil shall be free from weeds, sod, clods and stones larger than 1-inch, toxic substances, litter or other deleterious material. Spread evenly and grade to elevations and slopes shown. Hand rake areas inaccessible to machine grading.
   1. Utilize salvaged topsoil as the top layer to the extent available.
1. END OF SECTION

