---
title: Riprap
section: '313700'
divNumb: 31
divName: Earthwork
subgroup: Site and Infrastructure
tags: ['Site', 'Infrastructure', 'Earthwork', 'Riprap']
---

   1. section 31 37 00
   1. rip rap

General

* 
	1. **Summary
   1. Work under this section shall include placing of rip rap for protection of drainage ways against erosion. 
2. Related specification sections include:
	1. Section 31 01 00, Earthwork
	2. Section 31 20 00, Trenching, Bedding, and Backfill
	3. Section 33 40 00. Storm Drainage System
	4. **Quality Assurance
3. Work shall be per:
	1. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO):
		1. T103, Soundness of Aggregates by Freezing and Thawing.
	2. ASTM International (ASTM):
		1. C88, Standard Test Method for Soundness of Aggregates by Use of Sodium Sulfate or Magnesium Sulfate.
		2. C127, Standard Test Method for Density , Relative Density (Specific Gravity), and
	3. Absorption of Coarse Aggregate.
	4. **Submittals
4. See Specification Section 01 33 00 for requirements for the mechanics and administration of the submittal process.
5. Shop Drawings:
	1. Product technical data including acknowledgement that products submitted meet requirements of standards referenced.
	2. Certifications.
	3. Test reports.
	4. Submit all tests and certification in a single coordinated submittal.
		1. Partial submittals will not be accepted.
   ## Product
1. 2.1 Materials
   1. Stone:
	1. Durable broken quarry run stone.
	2. Does not disintegrate on exposure to water or weathering.
	3. Free from structural fractures and defects.
	4. Not containing shale, unsound sandstone, or other material which will disintegrate.
	5. Graded within limits specified.
	6. Breadth and thickness of any stone: Not less than one-third of its length.
	7. Gradation of the material: Well-graded to conform to governing requirements (e.g. State Department of Transportation, Governing Erosion Control Ordinance, or local reviewing agency with d50 clearly noted and dmax equal to 1.5 times d50. Class of rip-rap/stone shall be clearly noted on the plans.
	8. **Quality Control
2. Obtain samples from a local quarry that typically provides material to meet the regulatory requirements; for example, Department of Transportation, Department of Water Quality or similar other.
3. Source Tests:
	1. Supply certified tests and service records to determine acceptability and application of stone materials.
	2. In event suitable test reports or a service record that is satisfactory are not available, as in case of newly operated sources or waste stone found on site, subject material to tests necessary to determine its acceptability for use.
	3. For every 100 tons of each stone material to be used control tests to which materials to be subjected include:
		1. Specific gravity.
			1. Conform to ASTM C127.
			2. Not less than 2.40 minimum
		2. Soundness in magnesium sulfate.
			1. Conforms to ASTM C88, except maintain samples immersed in solution at a temperature of 80 °F (26 °C) +2 °F.
			2. Not more than 12 percent loss at five cycles.
		3. Soundness of Aggregates in Freezing and Thawing:
			1. Conform to AASHTO T103 method as modified herein.
			2. Ensure loss at 12 cycles of not more than 10 percent.
			3. Maintain temperature of cold liquid in range of -5 to 0 °F (-20 to -18 °C).
			4. Maintain thaw fluid temperature in range of 45 to 50 °F (7 to 10 °C).
			5. Permit length of freezing and of thawing cycles of 2 HRS with 1 HR of freezing following by 1 HR of thawing.
			6. Perform thawing by circulating thaw fluid around pan containing stone immersed in a depth of 1/4 IN rather than by total immersion.
		4. Such other tests as may be considered necessary to demonstrate satisfactorily that materials are acceptable include: Petrographic analysis, abrasion, absorption, and wetting & drying.


## Execution


* 
	1. **Preparation
   1. Bring areas that are below allowable minus tolerance limit to grade by filling with material similar to adjacent material.
2. Do not place any stone material on prepared base prior to inspection by Engineer.
3. For channels, swales, outlet protection or other drainage protection areas, top of material at design edges shall match adjoining grade. Top of stone shall match final design grades. Set grades to channel stormwater and not create a barrier.
4. For channels, swales, outlet protection and other drainage protection areas, stone shall be placed on top of one layer of non-woven geotextile fabric, Mirafi 140N or equal.
	1. **Placing
5. Place rip rap material on prepared foundation within limits indicated.
6. Place on prepared base to produce a well-graded mass of stone with minimum percentage of voids.
7. Place to required thickness and grades.
8. Place to full thickness in a single operation to avoid displacing the underlying material.
9. Distribute entire mass to conform to gradation specified.
	1. Do not place stone by dumping into chutes or by similar method likely to cause segregation.
10. Keep finished rip rap free from objectionable pockets of small stones or clusters of larger stone.
	1. Hand place as necessary to obtain a well-graded distribution.

*[this page intentionally left blank]*

