---
title: TEMPORARY BY-PASS PIPING
section: '330110.50'
divNumb: 33
divName: Utilities
subgroup: Site and Infrastructure
tags: ['Site', 'Infrastructure', 'Utilities', 'TEMPORARY', 'BY-PASS', 'PIPING']
---

## General

1. SCOPE
   1. This section addresses the temporary by-pass piping for the portable water main replacements.
   2. The Contractor shall furnish, install, maintain, and remove by-pass pipelines to provide water supply and fire protection to the City's customers during the water main construction. By-pass design for the complete project, including the location of temporary fire protection system and fire hydrants, shall be performed by the Contractor and shall be submitted to the Engineer for approval a minimum of fourteen (14) calendar days before the start of construction. The Contractor shall refer to the basic information provided in the Contract Documents for the design. The provided information will include system pressures, location of large and small services, and the location of fire hydrants. 
2. RELATED WORK SPECIFIED ELSEWHERE
   3. Standard Drawings
   4. Standard Specifications 01000, 01045, 01200, 01310, 01330, 01505, 01510, 01570, 02140, 02222, 02223, 02528, 02578, 03000, 03480, 03482, 09902, 09910, and Division 15.
3. SUBMITTALS
	1. The contractor shall prepare and submit for review and approval a by-pass piping plan capable of providing adequate pressures for water services and fire protection. Upon review and approval by the Fire Marshall and the Engineer, construction may proceed. 
   2. Furnish submittals in accordance with General Conditions and Section 01330 Submittal Procedures 
   3. By-pass Piping Drawings Shop Drawings shall contain the following information:
      1. Drawings:
         1. Layout drawings including necessary dimensions, details, pipe joints, fittings, specials, bolts and nuts, gaskets, valves, appurtenances, anchors, guides, and material lists. Fabrication drawings shall indicate spacers, adapters, connectors, fittings, and pipe supports to accommodate the equipment and valves in a complete and functional system. 

## Execution

1. CONSTRUCTION DETAILS
   1. Pipe and fittings employed in the by-pass pipelines shall be subject to approval by the Engineer for use. All by-pass piping sizes shall at a minimum match existing water main size to be replaced**. The Pipe and fittings shall be clean, free of rust, dirt, debris, and foreign material and shall consist of materials capable of withstanding the maximum system pressure. The by-pass pipelines shall provide adequate pressure and flows for all water services, existing fire protection systems and maintain required Fire Department fire flows at minimum pressures during construction. Pipe and fittings shall not impart any objectionable taste, odor, or color to the water being supplied. Plastic pipe or hose, when employed, shall bear the imprint of the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) approval for potable water, NSF-PW, or shall be capable of meeting the standards established by the NSF for this use. Where "lever" or "toggle" type couplings are employed for joining lengths of pipe for the by-pass pipelines, the couplings shall be installed in the inverted position to prevent accidental uncoupling of the pipelines. Each run of by-pass pipeline shall terminate with an 8-inch minimum size valve for flushing and chlorination. Service connections shall not be used from or downstream of this terminal valve. When connections are made to fire hydrants, the Contractor shall maintain the same number of available outlets as originally existed on the fire hydrant. By-pass shall not be connected to fire sprinkler inlets or fire ports of buildings.
   2. Changes or modification of the by-pass pipeline configuration may be made by the Contractor subject to the approval of the Engineer.
   3. Disinfection of the by-pass pipeline runs shall be performed by the Contractor in accordance with Specification Section 15041 Disinfection of Piping and Specification Section 15044 Hydrostatic Testing of Pressure Pipelines. Prior to disinfection, the Contractor shall thoroughly flush each run of by-pass pipeline to clear the pipe of dirt, debris, or foreign objects.
   4. During installation, maintenance, and removal of the by-pass pipelines, the Contractor shall maintain continuity of service to the City's customers at all times.
   5. Prior to commencement of operation of the by-pass pipelines, the Contractor shall furnish to the City the names and telephone numbers of the personnel designated to perform emergency repairs to the by-pass pipelines and service connections.
   6. When the by-pass pipeline crosses a wheelchair ramp or sidewalk and there is less than a 4-foot wide, unobstructed passageway, the Contractor shall install the pipeline in a recessed trench or if trench is infeasible shall provide a ramp at a slope not greater than 1:12 (≤ 8.33%). The by-pass shall be constructed and located so as to cause no impediment to vehicle traffic and the least impediment to pedestrians. In all alleys and all street crossings, the Contractor shall install the by-pass pipeline in a recessed trench. In all cases, temporary resurfacing of recessed trenches shall be flush with the existing grade. If the by-pass pipeline crosses a driveway or wheelchair ramp, the Contractor shall mound over or provide a safe crossing ramp on that portion of the pipeline. The Contractor shall install plastic sheets underneath temporary asphalt concrete used to ramp over by-pass pipelines at driveways and wheelchair ramps. Ingress or egress to any property thus served shall not be blocked.
   7. It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to maintain the temporary lines and service connections in good condition while they are in use. Leaking joints will not be permitted.
   8. The Contractor shall designate some member of his staff to be "on call" for making emergency repairs to the temporary lines and services at all times when the Contractor is not working, and this expense shall be included in the total bid price. If after a reasonable period of time there is no response to a call out, City forces will make the necessary repairs and the costs will be charged to the Contractor.
   9. After service has been restored to a section of the water main, the Contractor shall remove the by-pass pipeline and related facilities, shall repair all trench surfaces to original conditions, leave the streets, sidewalks, and adjacent areas in a clean and orderly condition, and shall otherwise comply with the cleanup requirements of these Specifications. By-pass shall not be used or remain in any portion of the project for longer than five (**5**) weeks unless it serves as a jumper to supply water to another section of the project.
   10. When directed by the City, the Contractor shall provide periodic daily flushing of by-pass pipelines to lower water temperatures. Flushing may also be required on weekends and holidays, depending on weather conditions.
   11. Before submitting their proposal, the bidder is strongly advised to examine site conditions and become fully informed regarding services larger than 2-inch. 
   12. A single check valve shall be installed on all outlets that are used as a source of supply for by-pass. The Contractor shall provide check valves with flanged ends or threaded ends.
   13. All work associated with the furnishing, design, installation, maintenance, and removal of by-pass pipelines shall be included in the contract unit price.
2. TEMPORARY SERVICE CONNECTIONS
   1. Following disinfection of the by-pass pipeline by the Contractor and before shutdown of the water main to be removed and replaced, the Contractor shall furnish, install, and maintain temporary service connections from the by-pass pipeline to the inlet side of the City's water meters, including fire and large domestic services. For large services in vaults, the Contractor shall conduct a field check for by-pass scenario and can either connect within the vault or excavate outside of the vault. Existing vaults may or may not have been built to a City Standard.
   2. Any movement or temporary relocation of water meters to facilitate the temporary connection shall be made only with approval of the Engineer. In the City of Santa Monica Water System, the water meter is the terminal unit of City ownership. Any relocations or modifications downstream of the water meter shall be made with approval of the City's customer. Since the condition of the customer's piping is unknown to the City, the Contractor shall prevent any damage or leakage in the customer's piping resulting from movement of the City's water meter or the customer's piping. If any damage or leakage should occur, the Contractor shall repair the customer's piping in a timely manner at the Contractor's own expense.
   3. Temporary service hoses shall be placed to cause the least impediment to traffic and pedestrians. A barricade shall be placed over every meter box service location. All temporary risers, valves or large fittings in the parking areas of a street must be protected with a sand bag.
   4. Fireline services and water meters larger than 2 inches shall be pressurized with the existing size connection, or as directed by the Engineer.
   5. The Contractor shall prevent any damage or leakage in the customer's piping resulting from movement of the City's water meter or the customer's piping. If any leakage or damage should occur, the Contractor shall repair the customer's piping as quickly as possible at his sole expense.
   6. The Contractor shall be required to notify customers in accordance with Specification Section 01045 prior to shutdown of the water main and to mediate any conflicts. The Contractor shall coordinate with any and all uninterruptible customers such as hospitals, kidney dialysis centers, schools, restaurants, and any other customers with critical water needs. This coordination may include, but not be limited to, performing work required in this Article during non-business hours of the day.
   7. Flexible pipe and fittings employed for connections shall be subject to approval by the Engineer. Flexible pipe and fittings shall consist of materials capable of withstanding the pressures shown on the drawings and shall not impart any objectionable taste, odor, or color to the water being supplied. Plastic pipe or hose, when employed, shall bear the imprint of the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) approval for potable water (NSF-PW) or shall be capable of meeting the standards established by the NSF for this use.
   8. After service has been restored to a section of the water main, the Contractor shall disconnect the temporary service connections, furnish and install insulating tailpieces for services tapped off of steel mains, and reconnect the service laterals from the water main to the water meters. Prior to connection to the water meter, each service lateral shall be flushed for not less than 30 seconds to clear the lateral of any debris from the cleaning and lining operation. Should the flow through the lateral appear to be impaired, the Contractor shall make the necessary repairs to restore full.
   9. The Contractor shall immediately distribute Contractor-furnished notices to all service locations where the Contractor was unable to flush the service lateral prior to connecting the service lateral to the meter.
   10. All work associated with the connecting, disconnecting, and maintenance of temporary service connections shall be included in the contract unit price for cement-mortar lining.
3. TEMPORARY SUPPLY LINES AND SERVICE - GENERAL
   1. The Contractor shall furnish all plant, equipment, materials, transportation, superintendence, labor and workmanship necessary to provide temporary service to water consumer and fire hydrants. The Contractor shall live tap and connect to water mains or to fire hydrants as approval of the Engineer. Connection to fire hydrants for water supply shall be with Contractor-furnished approved Siamese fitting, eddy valve and a tee. When tapping 4-inch through 12-inch mains, a service clamp is required. Contractor shall block, restrain and support temporary supply pipes as required.
4. TEMPORARY CONNECTION FOR WATER SUPPLY TO AN 8-INCH (8”-12”) BY-PASS PIPELINES
   1. The Contractor shall install, maintain, and remove 8-inch through 12-inch, temporary bulkheads at locations determined by the Contractor and approved by the Engineer to provide water supply to 8-inch through 12-inch by-pass pipelines. The 8-inch through 12-inch temporary bulkheads shall be installed on existing 6-inch, 8-inch, and l2-inch, cast-iron, ductile iron, and steel pipelines and shall be installed with the pipelines temporarily out of service.
   2. The Contractor shall attach a 8-inch through 12-inch diameter hose to the temporary bulkhead to supply the by-pass pipelines. The hose shall be laid in a trench and shall be covered with a temporary asphalt material to a depth flush to the existing grade. The hose shall connect to the 8-inch through 12-inch by-pass pipelines at the curb. The hose shall be subject to approval by the Engineer in accordance with Sub-article 2.2 H. (Temporary Service Connections).
   3. The Contractor shall furnish, install, and remove the following temporary fittings for each connection in accordance with Table 1 below.
   4. Equivalent fittings may be used to provide a temporary connection of equal quality and similar configuration. These materials shall be submitted to the Engineer for review a minimum of fourteen (**14**) calendar days prior to use.
   5. The work for each temporary bulkhead shall include, but not be limited to, pavement removal, excavation, removal and reinstallation of the nipple, and installation and removal of the temporary bulkhead. The nipple shall be reinstalled.
   6. In lieu of a temporary bulkhead, the City may install a tap in the Contractor's excavation and may provide the Contractor with a flanged outlet gate valve to connect with the by-pass pipeline.
   7. All work associated with the installation of temporary bulkheads or City-installed taps for water supply shall be included in the contract unit price for “Furnish and Install 8-Inch and 12-Inch PVC Water Main”.
   8. The work for each temporary connection shall include, but not be limited to, pavement removal, excavation, installation and removal of the connection assembly, capping the corporation valve, slurry backfill, and permanent paving, all in accordance with these specifications.

### Table 1

| MANUFACTURER AND PART NO. | ITEM | MAIN SIZE |
| ------------------------- | ---- | --------- |
| JAMES JONES | SERVICE CLAMP | 1-1\2" X 4", 6", 8" and 1-1\2" X 10", and 12" |
| MUELLER | SERVICE CLAMP | 4", 6", 8", 10", 12", and 16" |
| FORD | SERVICE CLAMP | 4", 6", 8" J-975 10", 12", J-979 and 16" J-979 |

| 4" H-16080 1-1\2"CC |
| 6" H-16084 1-1\2"CC |
| 8" H-16088 1-1\2"CC |
| 10" H-16134 1-1\2"CC |
| 12" H-16137 1-1\2"CC |
| 4" 101B-540 X CC6 |
| 6" 101B-750 X CC6 |
| 8" 101B-962 X CC6 |
| 10" 202B-1212 X CC6 |
| 12" 202B-1438 X CC6 |
| 1-1\2" CORP. VALVE |
| C.C. X C.T. |
| ALL |
| J-1930 |
| 1-1\2" X 1-1\2" |
| H-15000- OR B-25000 |
| 1-1\2" X 1-1\2" |
| FB-600 |
| 1-1\2" X 1-1\2" |
| 1- 1\2" COPPER TUBE |
| ALL |
| H-10033 1-1\2" |
| H-10035 1-1\2" |
| H-15082 1-1\2" |
| C01-66 |
| 2" X 2" BRASS COUPLING |
| B&S X I.P. THREAD |
| ALL |
| H-15405 1-1\2" |
| 2" X 2" X 1" TEE, I.P. THREAD |
| ALL |
| 1" CURB VALVE, I.P. |
| THREAD - FEMALE |
| ALL |
| 2" NIPPLE, I.P. THREAD X VICTAULIC GROOVE |
| ALL |
----
