---
title: Polyvinyl Chloride Pressure Pipe
section: '330531.13'
divNumb: 33
divName: Utilities
subgroup: Site and Infrastructure
tags: ['Site', 'Infrastructure', 'Utilities', 'Polyvinyl', 'Chloride', 'Pressure', 'Pipe']
---

1. SECTION 15064
1. POLYVINYL CHLORIDE (PVC) PRESSURE PIPE

## General

01. DESCRIPTION
   1. This section includes materials and installation procedures for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pressure pipe. Generally, this section refers to the materials and procedures for installing pipe and appurtenances for potable and recycled water systems.
02. REFERENCE STANDARDS
   1. The publications listed below form part of this specification to the extent referenced and are referred to in the text by the basic designation only. Reference shall be made to the latest edition of said standards unless otherwise called for.
   1. AWWA C900 - Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pressure Pipe and Fabricated Fittings, 4” through 12”, for Water Transmission and Distribution
   1. AWWA M23 - PVC Pipe - Design and Installation Uni-Bell - Handbook of PVC Pipe Design and Construction
03. RELATED WORK SPECIFIED ELSEWHERE
   1. Standard Drawings
2. Standard Specifications 01000, 01045, 01200, 01310, 01330, 01505, 01510, 01570, 02140, 02222, 02223, 02511, 02528, 02578, 03000, 03480, 03482, 09902, 09910, and Division 15.
04. SERVICE APPLICATION
   1. PVC pipe will be used to transport and distribute potable water or recycled water as indicated on the Approved Plans.
2. In accordance with their AWWA designations blue PVC pipe shall be used for potable water pipe sizes as follows:
3. Blue 4” C900 PVC pipe shall be used for the installation of appurtenances such as air valves, blowoffs and fire services.
4. Blue C900 PVC pipe shall be used for mains and related appurtenances sized 6” through 12".
5. Blue C905 PVC pipe shall be used for mains sized 14" through 36”.
05. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
   1. PVC pipe shall be provided in standard 20' lengths, unless otherwise detailed or required on the Approved Plans. When deep trenches or shoring restrictions hinder the use of the standard length sections, the use of 10' and 15' lengths shall be allowed. Random lengths are not allowed.
2. The minimum length of PVC pipe sections used for tie-ins and stub-outs shall be three (3) times the pipe diameter or 48” or greater, whichever is longer, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. Pipe lengths less than 48” shall be ductile iron pipe.
3. Horizontal Radius:
      1. In areas where it is required to lay the pipe along a curve, the use of deflection couplings will be used to form the arc. The pipe shall not be bent to form the arc, nor shall the pipe be deflected within integral bells or ductile-iron fittings. Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, PVC pipe shall be installed using 5 degree deflection couplings (2½° at each bell) to form arcs with radii no less than the minimums noted below:
      1. Pipe Length Used Minimum Radius
   1. 20' 229'
   1. 10' 115'
   1. Combination (refer to Section 3) 76'
06. QUALITY ASSURANCE
   1. The manufacturer of each shipment of pipe shall be required to supply a statement certifying that each lot or load of pipe has been subjected to the tests specified for PVC pipe, and has been found to meet all the requirements of AWWA C900 and/or C905 as applicable.
2. PVC pipe shall carry a current certification of the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF) as acceptable to use in the transport of potable water. 
3. PVC pipe and couplings shall bear indelible identification markings as required by AWWA C900 and C905. In addition, all pipes shall bear a “home” mark on the spigot end to indicate proper penetration when the joint is made. The pipe markings for PVC pipe for recycled water systems shall include the designation “Urban-Treated Run-Off” in addition to the identification markings required by AWWA.
07. DELIVERY, STORAGE, AND HANDLING
   1. PVC pipe shall be stored in suppliers' yards and on the job site in accordance with AWWA M23 and the manufacturer's recommendations. Store PVC pipe in the field by supporting the pipe uniformly in accordance with AWWA M23. Pipe shall not be stacked higher that 4’ or with weight on the bell ends.
2. Cover stored PVC pipe with an opaque material to protect it from the sun's ultraviolet radiation shall not be stored more than one week or the materials will be rejected for use. PVC pipe that has been subjected to excess ultraviolet radiation as identified by color fading or chalking shall not be used. The determination as to the acceptability of PVC pipe shall rest solely with the City Engineer.
3. PVC pipe that has been contaminated in any way with petroleum products (on the inside or outside of the pipe) shall not be used.
08. SERVICE SADDLES FOR PVC PIPE
   1. Service saddles shall be used for the installation of pipe appurtenances 2” and smaller in accordance with Section 15057.
09. FITTINGS
   1. Ductile-iron fittings shall be used for the installation of pipe appurtenances 4” and larger in accordance with Section 15056.
10. JOINT RESTRAINT
   1. Joint restraint systems in accordance with Section 15000 shall be used where indicated on the Approved Plans or where concrete thrust blocks are not practical, with the prior approval of the City Engineer.
11. TRACER WIRE
   1. Tracer wire shall be installed for all PVC water mains, whether potable or recycled, in accordance with Section 15000.
12. WARNING/IDENTIFICATION TAPE
   1. Warning/Identification tape shall be installed for all PVC water mains, whether potable or recycled, in accordance with Section 15000.
1. PART 2 MATERIALS
1. 2.01 POLYVINYL CHLORIDE PIPE
   1. PVC pressure pipe and appurtenant components and materials shall be selected from the Approved Materials List, or approved equal. Provide pipe with cast-iron equivalent outside diameter, and integral wall-thickened bell and spigot ends. 
2. All potable water pipe shall be blue PVC pipe. Pipe sizes 14” diameter and smaller shall comply with the requirements of AWWA C900 or AWWA C905 pressure Class 305 (DR14) unless otherwise noted. Treated Urban Runoff water pipe shall be purple.
3. All potable water pipe shall be blue PVC pipe. Pipe sizes greater than 14” shall comply with the requirements of AWWA C905 pressure rating 235 (DR 18) unless otherwise noted. Treated Urban Run-Off pipe shall be purple.
1. 2.07 TRACER WIRE
   1. Tracer wire materials shall be in accordance with Section 15000 and selected from the Approved Materials List, or approved equal.
1. 2.08 WARNING/IDENTIFICATION TAPE
   1. Warning/Identification tape materials shall be in accordance with Section 15000 and selected from the Approved Materials List, or approved equal.
1. 

## Execution

1. 3.01 GENERAL
   1. At all times when the work of installing pipe is not in progress, including worker break times, the ends of the pipe shall be closed with tight-fitting, vermin-proof and child-proof caps or plugs. Do not permit trench water to enter the pipe. Do not place tools, clothing, or other materials in the pipe. The Contractor shall maintain the interior of the pipe in a sanitary condition free from foreign materials at all times.
2. Proper care shall be used to prevent damage in handling, moving and placing the pipe. All pipe, fittings, valves, and other pipeline materials shall be lowered into the trench in a manner that prevents damage. The pipe shall not be dropped, dragged or handled in a manner that will cause bruises, cracks, or other damage. PVC pipe that has been gouged, scratched, or otherwise damaged shall be subject to rejection at the discretion of the City Engineer.
3. Where pipe lengths less than the standard 20’ are required, the pipe sections shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation guide (with the exception of deflection at the bell and spigot, which is not allowed) and shall only be used as specified herein or with the approval of the City Engineer. The minimum pipe length permitted is 5', except at tie-ins and stub-outs, where the minimum pipe length permitted is three (3) times the pipe diameter or 4’, whichever is longer, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
1. 3.02 TRENCHING, BACKFILLING AND COMPACTION
   1. Trenching, bedding, backfilling and compaction operations shall be performed in accordance with Section 02223.
1. 3.03 DEWATERING
   1. Dewatering of trench excavations shall be performed in accordance with Section 02140. If flooding of the trench does occur, the Contractor shall immediately dewater and restore the trench. Damaged or altered pipelines, appurtenances, or trench materials shall be repaired or replaced as directed by the City Engineer.
1. 3.04 PIPE INSTALLATION
   1. When the work requires and the size of the pipe allows entry of personnel into the pipe, the Contractor shall comply with all Federal and State regulations for confined space entry. Work inside pipelines shall not be undertaken until all the tests and safety provisions of the Code of Federal Regulations 1910.146, and the General Industry Safety Orders of the California Code of Regulations, Title 8, and Section 5159 for confined space entry have been performed and the area is verified as safe to enter. 
   1. The Contractor shall furnish and install all pipe, specials, fittings, closure pieces, valves, supports, bolts, nuts, gaskets, jointing materials, and all other appurtenances as shown on the Approved Plans and as required to provide a complete and workable installation. Install pipe in the trench as follows:
      1. Inspect each section of pipe prior to lowering the pipe into the trench. Thoroughly clean the ends of the pipe. Remove foreign matter and dirt from inside of the pipe and keep clean during and after installation.
2. Install pipe according to the manufacturer's approved order of installation to the proper lines and grades in accordance with the Approved Plans and as follows:
3. Install pipe uphill if the grade exceeds ten percent (10%).
4. Installation tolerances for the pipe shall not vary more than 2” horizontally or 1” vertically from the alignment and elevations shown on the Approved Plans.
5. Install the pipe such that the identification markings on each pipe section are continuously aligned for the total length of the pipeline alignment. Orient the strip marking upward to the 12 o’clock position (top) of the trench opening.
6. The pipe shall have firm bearing along its full length, and bell holes shall be provided at each joint to permit visual inspection of the joint and prevent the pipe from being supported by the bell end or coupling.
7. The beveled end of the pipe shall be removed prior to insertion into a mechanical joint fitting.
8. Field cutting and milling shall be performed in accordance with the manufacturer’s written instructions to equal the quality of shop-fabricated ends.
9. Pipe Assembly:
10. Push-On Type: Assemble the pipe joint using a lubricant selected from the Approved Materials List. Insert the spigot end into the bell or coupling to the proper insertion mark. Check that the elastomeric ring has not left the groove during assembly by passing a feeler gauge around the completed joint. Drive spigot ends of the pipe into bell ends in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Stabbing shall not be permitted.
11. Mechanical-Joint Type: Assembly of mechanical joint fittings shall be in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations regarding installation.
12. PVC pipe shall not be bent, nor shall PVC pipe be deflected at pipe connections other than deflection couplings. Install deflection couplings selected from the Approved Materials List, or approved equal, for horizontal and vertical changes in direction not greater than 5 degrees, and for installation of pipe through curves. Pipe sections of differing lengths may be used as follows to facilitate the installation of pipelines through curves: 
13. Allowable lengths of pipe sections through curves are 20’, 10’, or 5’ only.
14. No more than two 5' pipe sections may be used in succession without being separated by a 20’ or 10' section. Pipe layout through curves is subject to approval by the City Engineer. In no case shall the minimum radius be less than 76'.
1. 3.05 SUPPORT FOR DUCTILE-IRON FITTINGS AND VALVES
   1. All ductile-iron fittings and valves require concrete support blocks in accordance with Sections 15055, 15056 and 15100 to prevent the fitting or valve weight from being carried by the PVC pipe.
1. 3.06 THRUST AND ANCHOR BLOCKS
   1. Concrete thrust and anchor blocks shall be installed in accordance with Section 03000 and the Standard Drawings.
1. 3.07 JOINT RESTRAINT SYSTEMS
   1. Joint restraint systems shall be installed in accordance with Section 15000. Joint restraint lengths along new pipelines are as shown on the Restrained Length table in the Approved Plans. If the installation of concrete thrust blocks is not practical and use of joint restraint systems are approved by the City Engineer, calculations indicating joint restraint lengths along new pipelines shall be submitted to the City Engineer for approval.
1. 3.08 TRACER WIRE
   1. Tracer wire shall be installed in accordance with Section 15000 and the Standard Drawings.
1. 3.09 WARNING/IDENTIFICATION TAPE
   1. Warning/Identification tape shall be installed in accordance with Section 15000 and the Standard Drawings.

* 
	1. **DISINFECTION AND BACTERIOLOGICAL TESTING
   1. Disinfection, bacteriological testing and flushing shall be performed in accordance with Section 15041.

* 
	1. **HYDROSTATIC TESTING
   1. Field hydrostatic testing shall be performed in accordance with Section 15044.
1. END OF SECTION

