---
title: Hydrostatic Testing
section: '330505.31'
divNumb: 33
divName: Utilities
subgroup: Site and Infrastructure
tags: ['Site', 'Infrastructure', 'Utilities', 'Hydrostatic', 'Testing']
---

## General

01. DESCRIPTION
   1. This section describes the requirements and procedures for pressure and leakage testing of all pressure mains.
02. RELATED WORK SPECIFIED ELSEWHERE
   1. Standard Drawings
2. Standard Specifications 01000, 01045, 01200, 01310, 01330, 01505, 01510, 01570, 02140, 02222, 02223, 02511, 02528, 02578, 03000, 03480, 03482, 09902, 09910, and Division 15.
03. REQUIREMENTS PRIOR TO TESTING
   1. All piping, valves, fire hydrants, services, and related appurtenances shall be installed.
2. All concrete thrust block and anchor blocks shall be allowed to cure in accordance with Section 03000.
3. Pressure tests on exposed and aboveground piping shall be conducted only after the entire piping system has been installed and attached to pipe supports, hangers or anchors as shown on the Approved Plans.
4. Steel pipelines shall not be tested until factory-applied mortar linings and coatings on all pipe lengths have been in place for a minimum of fourteen (14) days. Steel pipelines with cement mortar field-applied to the interior of the pipeline shall not be filled with water until a minimum of eight (8) hours has elapsed after the final placement of cement mortar, unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
04. HYDROSTATIC TESTING AND DISINFECTION OF PIPELINES
   1. Hydrostatic testing of pipelines shall be performed prior to disinfection operations in accordance with Section 15041. In the event repairs are necessary, as indicated by the hydrostatic test, the City Engineer may require additional flushing in accordance with Section 15041.
05. CONNECTION TO EXISTING MAINS
   1. Hydrostatic testing shall be performed prior to connections to existing mains. City authorization for connection to the existing system shall be given only on the basis of acceptable hydrostatic, disinfection and bacteriological test results. Connection to existing mains shall be performed in accordance with Section 15000.
1. PART 2 MATERIALS
1. 2.01 WATER
   1. Potable water, supplied by a source approved by the City Engineer, shall be used for all hydrostatic testing of potable and recycled water mains.
1. 2.02 CONNECTIONS
   1. Testing water shall be supplied through a metered connection equipped with a backflow prevention device in accordance with Section 15112 at the point of connection to the potable water source used.
2. The Contractor shall provide any temporary piping needed to deliver potable water to the piping that is to be tested. Temporary piping shall be in accordance with Section 15000.
1. 

## Execution

1. 3.01 GENERAL
   1. The Contractor shall provide the City Engineer with a minimum of 48 hours’ notice prior to the requested date and time for hydrostatic tests.
2. The Contractor shall furnish all labor, materials, tools, and equipment for testing.
3. Temporary blocking during the tests will be permitted only at temporary plugs, caps or where otherwise directed by the City Engineer.
4. All valves and appurtenances shall be operated during the test period. The test shall be conducted with valves in the open position.
5. At the onset of testing, all valves, air vacuum assemblies, blowoffs, and services shall be monitored for possible leakage and repairs made, if necessary, before the test proceeds. The appurtenances shall be monitored through the duration of the testing. 
6. Pipelines with cement-mortar lining shall be filled with water and placed under a minimum pressure of 172 KPa (25 psi) for at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to hydrostatic testing.
1. 3.02 FIELD TEST PROCEDURE
   1. Before applying the specified test pressure, care shall be taken to release all air within the pipe and appurtenances to be tested. Air shall be released through services, fire hydrants, air release valves, or other approved locations.
   1. A five (5) hour hydrostatic pressure test shall be performed after the pipe and all appurtenances have been installed and after any trench backfill compaction with heavy duty compaction equipment has been completed. The hydrostatic test pressure shall be 50 psi above the class rating of the pipe, or 200 psi, whichever is less, or as otherwise directed by the City Engineer, at the lowest point in the section of pipe being tested. The hydrostatic test pressure at the highest point in the section of pipe being tested shall be within 345 KPa (50 psi) of the hydrostatic test pressure at the lowest point in the section of pipe being tested. The test pressure shall be applied and continuously maintained by pumping for a period of four (4) hours. During the pumping phase of the test, the test pressure shall be maintained at not less than ninety-five percent (95%) of the specified test pressure at all times. At the end of the fourth (4th) hour, the pressure shall meet the requirements stated above. Pumping shall then be discontinued for one hour and the drop in pressure shall be recorded. Pumping shall then be resumed to restore the initial test pressure, and the quantity of water pumped into the line shall be accurately measured. The quantity thus measured is the amount of pipe leakage, which shall not exceed the following limits:
      1. The allowable leakage for flanged or welded steel pipe or for flanged ductile-iron pipe shall be zero.
   1. The allowable leakage for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe or for steel or ductile-iron pipe with rubber joints shall be calculated using the following formula:
      1. 5 gallons x nominal diameter of pipe (in.) x length of pipe (ft.)
   1. 24 (hrs.) x 5,280 (ft.)
   1. If the leakage exceeds the allowable loss, the leak points shall be located and repaired as required by the City Engineer. All defective pipes, fittings, valves and other appurtenances discovered shall be removed and replaced with sound material. Additional disinfection shall be performed as necessary per Section 15041. The hydrostatic test shall be repeated until the leakage does not exceed the rate specified above. All visible leaks shall be similarly repaired.


