---
title: Common Work Results for Utilities
section: '330500'
divNumb: 33
divName: Utilities
subgroup: Site and Infrastructure
tags: ['Site', 'Infrastructure', 'Utilities', 'Common', 'Work', 'Results']
---

## General

1. DEFINITIONS
   1. This section describes the procedures for locating, protecting, and relocating existing underground utilities, surface improvements, and requirements to connect to existing facilities.
2. Do not perform work that would affect any oil, gas, sewer, or water pipeline; any telephone, telegraph, or electric transmission line; any fence; or any other structure, prior to providing the owner of the improvement due notice of the beginning of work, and remove, shore, support, or otherwise protect such pipeline, transmission line, ditch, fence, or structure, or replace same.
3. Related Work Specified Elsewhere
4. Standard Drawings
5. Standard Specifications:
   1. Division 01, General Requirements.
   2. Division 22, Plumbing.
   3. Division 33, Utilities.
6. Condition of Existing Facilities
7. Neither the City nor the Design Engineers warrant the condition, size, material, and location of existing facilities.
8. Existing Facility location
9. The contractor shall be responsible for verifying in advance the location of all existing pipelines and subsurface utilities and structures as marked by (USA) Underground Services Alert as shown on the plans. Discrepancies shall be reported to the project engineer, prior to the fabrication of, or purchase of material and construction affected by the discrepancy.
10. EXISTING FACILITY DOCUMENTATION
11. After the Notice to Proceed issued and before Work at site is started, Contractor and City shall make thorough examination of pre-existing conditions including existing buildings, structures, pipelines, roadways, and other improvements in vicinity of Work, as applicable, which might be impacted or potentially damaged by construction operations.
12. Contractor shall take photographs and videotape to document preexisting conditions prior to the start of the work. Include public roads and improvements to adjacent private property as part of preexisting condition documentation. Three sets of dated photographs and three copies of the dated video provided on DVD shall be submitted to the City prior to the beginning of construction. The City will review, sign, and return one record copy to Contractor to be kept on file in Contractor's field office as site records.
13. These photographs and videotapes are intended for use as indisputable evidence in ascertaining whether and to what extent damage occurred as a result of Contractor's operations, and is for protection of Contractor and City.
14. The Contractor shall notify property owners adjacent to the site and property owners located on streets that will be closed or restricted by the Work. Notification shall be in the form of a letter, reviewed and approved by City and delivered a minimum of 15 days before construction is scheduled to commence. The Contractor shall be available to attend one community meeting to answer public questions regarding the project if requested to do so. The meeting time, date and location will be provided by City for inclusion in the notification letter.
15. UTILITY VERIFICATION
16. Existing utilities have been identified and located on the Plans based on available information, including above ground utility evidence, mapping provided by utility agencies, and potholing during design of the project. In general, the subsurface utility engineering was complete per ASCE 38-02, Quality Level C. The Contractor shall be responsible for verifying the location of all existing utilities within the entire pipe trench of the new water main. The necessary verification for existing utilities shall commence prior to constructing the new water main.
17. The Contractor shall contact all utility owners a minimum of 72 hours in advance of any excavations to verify existing utilities and substructures. Utility verification may result in modification of the pipeline alignment or profile to avoid conflict with existing utilities that are found to be in a different location than shown on the Drawings. Minor modifications involving no increase in pipe length, number of fittings, or appurtenances shall be made at no additional cost to the City.
18. Delays resulting from discoveries during potholing shall not justify additional time and monetary compensation to the Contractor.
19. The Contractor shall perform exploratory excavations within the new water main pipe trench to determine the actual location, depth and required listed information in 1.06.E all utilities parallel and crossing the new water main. In the event it is required to deepen the pipe trench to lower the new water main to avoid obstructions, the contractor shall be required to verify for all utilities within the required depth of the revised pipe trench. The Contractor shall conduct exploratory excavations a minimum of two days prior to pipeline installation to provide sufficient lead time to resolve utility conflicts. Utilities that were potholed will be provided to the Contractor. The Contractor may perform additional utility verification at his discretion to ensure safety and progress of the work at no additional cost to the City.
20. The Contractor shall provide the Engineer with the following information for the existing utilities or substructures within the pipe trench of the new pipeline:
21. Horizontal location as measured from two existing features shown on the Drawings
22. Depth to the top and bottom of utility from ground surface
23. Size (diameter, width, and depth)
24. Roundness of pipe
25. Circumference
26. Width
27. Material
28. Type of utility
29. Pipeline station where the conflict is located
30. Exploratory excavations shall be backfilled with one sack cement slurry and patched to match existing pavement profile and reopened to traffic as soon as practicable after the data is obtained. If the excavation is located within an area to be resurfaced as part of the pipeline installation, the surface course of the pothole shall be temporarily patched with cold mix AC which shall be removed before the final pavement patch is installed.
31. PROTECTION OF EXISTING FACILITIES
32. The Contractor's attention is directed to the possible existence of pipe and other underground improvements that may or may not be shown on the Approved Plans. Once discovered, the Contractor shall preserve and protect all such improvements whether shown on the Approved Plans or not. The Contractor shall provide and install suitable safeguards, and shall be responsible for the care and protection of all existing utilities and substructures including but not limited to:
    1. sewer and water pipe (including laterals and services), electrical and telephone conduits, gas mains and service lines, oil mains culverts, or other above-ground or below-ground facilities or structures which may be encountered in or near the area of work. It shall be the responsibility of the Contractor to notify USA and each agency of jurisdiction and utility company and to make arrangements for location of facilities prior to beginning construction. In the event of damage to existing facilities during the progress of the work, such facilities shall be replaced or restored to original condition, as determined by City, at the Contractor’s expense.
33. The Contractor shall be responsible for determining in advance the location, elevation, alignment and pipe type and size of all existing pipelines to which connections are to be made (reference Section 1.05.F). Potholing to determine location will be allowed only after providing the City with three (3) day's advance notice. The contractor is required to contact Underground Service Alert (USA) at 1-800-227-2600 or 1-800-422-4133 for mark-out of all utilities in the area of the work.
34. If the Contractor, either before commencing work or during the course of the work, finds any discrepancy between specifications or drawings and the physical conditions at the site of the work, Contractor shall promptly notify the City in writing of such discrepancy.
35. The Contractor is to prepare a support plan for each utility crossing detailing the intended support method. The Contractor is responsible to provide shoring, underpinning, and structural support for existing utility lines and structures that become suspended or otherwise unsupported because of adjacent excavation operations. Contractor must obtain approval from the owner of the utility prior to excavation of the utility.
36. PROTECTION OF LANDSCAPING
37. The Contractor shall be responsible for the protection of all trees, shrubs, fences, and other landscape items adjacent to or within the work area, unless specific removals are indicated on the Approved Plans.
38. In the event of damage to landscape items, including the thickness of topsoil, the Contractor shall replace the damaged items in kind, in a manner satisfactory to the City.
39. When pipelines are proposed within planted or otherwise improved areas in public or private easements, the Contractor shall restore such areas to original condition after completion of the work.
40. When pipelines are proposed within unimproved areas, the ground surface shall be dressed smooth to the contour of the original ground and left in a neat, presentable condition, free of cleared vegetation, rubbish and other construction wastes. Rocks and clumps that cannot be readily covered by spreading shall be hauled away and disposed of by the Contractor.
41. Unimproved areas disturbed during construction of the pipeline shall be hydro seeded in accordance with these Standard Specifications.
42. PUBLIC UTILITY RELOCATION
43. In case it should be necessary to relocate or temporarily maintain the property of any public utility or any other property, and it is understood that the cost of such relocation or temporary maintenance is not required to be borne by the owner of the utility or property, the Contractor shall bear all expenses incidental to the removal or temporary maintenance of such property in a manner satisfactory to said owner. It is understood that in such cases, the utility or property owner has the option of doing such work with his or her own forces, or permitting the work to be performed by the Contractor.
44. The right is reserved to the State, County, City, and utility owners to enter at any time upon any street, alley, right of way or easement for the purpose of making changes for maintenance or repairs to their property necessitated by the Contractor's work.
45. Permits
46. All work shall conform to the specifications and requirements of the State of California Department of Transportation, the County, the City having jurisdiction, and all other affected agencies involved. The Contractor shall obtain and keep a copy of all the required permits in the job site and comply with all the terms and conditions of said permits. Permits shall also include any related to the abandonment of an existing water or sewer pipe.

## Products

1. All materials used in making the connection or removing the facility from service shall conform to the applicable sections of the project specifications and the Approved Materials.

## Execution

1. General cut in Connection information
   1. Unless otherwise indicated on the Approved Plans or specifically directed by the City Engineer, all connections to existing facilities, cut-in installations, shall be performed by Contractor. All types of connections to existing water facilities shall be performed in strict accordance with the following procedures.
   1. The contractor shall submit a connection plan developed for all connections (including multiple connections) to the City’s water system. The connection plan is to be prepared with the intent of minimizing service interruptions to City customers. The connection plan will be reviewed and approved by the City prior to proceeding with any work.
2. The Contractor shall furnish the required fittings, valves, and all other materials per the Approved Plans as called for in the Standard Specifications in accordance with the Approved Materials List. The Contractor shall provide all equipment and labor required for the excavation and installation of the connection including but not limited to thrust blocks, thrust restraints, lights, and barricades, backfill and pavement replacement. In certain circumstances the Contractor may be required to provide temporary piping (high lining) as part of the equipment for making the connections. In addition, the Contractor shall assist the City in alleviating any hardship incurred during a shutdown for connections. Emergency standby equipment or materials may be required of the Contractor by the City Engineer.
3. FIELD VERIFICATION OF Cut in Connection
   1. Prior to construction, Contractor shall pothole or excavate the existing pipe at the location of the proposed connection. The City Engineer shall inspect the pothole/excavation prior to Contractor’s repair of trench. Contractor shall record the following information on as-built drawings:
4. Pipe size, outside diameter.
5. Pipe Roundness
6. Pipe type such as ACP, PVC, Ductile-Iron or Steel.
7. Pipe class and/or pressure rating.
8. Elevation, grade, and alignment.
9. Location of collars, pipe bells, fittings or couplings, if found.
10. Potential conflicts with existing utilities.
11. The recorded information shall be used by the Contractor to verify the materials submitted during the shop drawing submittal phase of the project are of the proper size and application. Contractor is responsible for verifying and demonstrating the approved materials for the connection are adequate and within product manufacturer tolerances and recommendations. This verification will be presented to the City in form of a new and separate submittal. Should the approved materials be determined inadequate by the City Engineer the Contractor shall submit new materials for review and approval.
12. SYSTEM SHUTDOWN
13. Prior to cutting an existing pipe the Contractor shall schedule a meeting with the City to discuss the connection plan (Section 3.01.A) and schedule any required shutdown of the existing water system. Shutdowns may be required at times other than normal working hours to cause the least amount of inconvenience to customers and to avoid the use of temporary by-pass piping. Therefore, this should be considered in determining the bid price for the work.
14. The Contractor shall refer to water system atlas maps and be responsible for identifying shutdown valves and the respective water main lengths affected by the shutdown. Water main lengths provide the Contractor with estimate water volumes to be properly disposed of per GENERAL CONDITIONS Article 3.24.3, 3.24.4 and 3.24.5. Refer to Appendix B for Water System Atlas Maps.
15. Shutdowns will be scheduled at the convenience of the City. In general, shutdowns shall not be scheduled for Mondays or Fridays or within two days of a nationally-observed holiday. Shutdowns may be scheduled for nights or weekends if required.
16. The Contractor shall give the City a minimum of five (5) calendar days and one (1) calendar days’ notice prior to any proposed excavation or shutdown of existing mains or services. Scheduling shall be subject to approval by the Construction Manager. Shutdowns cannot be scheduled on Mondays, Fridays, or the day after a holiday.
17. The City may postpone or reschedule any shutdown operation if, for any reason, the City Engineer believes that the Contractor is not prepared with competent personnel, equipment, or materials to proceed with the connection.
18. The Contractor shall provide line stopping techniques to minimize customer services interruption where indicated. Line stopping shall be performed by a firm with a minimum of five years’ line stopping experience. The Contractor shall be responsible for providing the Traffic Control Plans per the City’s requirements and their implementation for all line stopping. Traffic Control Plans must be reviewed and approved by the City of Santa Monica Traffic Division. The Contractor shall also be responsible for providing engineering for all thrust restraint required for line stopping operation. Actual line stopping locations and sizes are dependent on field conditions and valve operations and are subject to change. No extra compensation will be provided for location changes and this should be considered in determining the bid price for the work.
19. The City will perform the initial and subsequent valve operations to isolate the mains affected. However, the Contractor shall notify the City not less than three (3) working days in advance of when such service is desired. During the course of system shutdown if a valve becomes inoperable or will not fully close, the Contractor shall allow the City adequate time for the emergency repairs that may be necessary. If the existing valves cannot be operated, Contractor shall meet with the City to determine if valves must be replaced or if plugs (line stops) can be used for the Work. The City will make a concerted effort to make the repairs in a timely manner. The City will recharge the system after completion of work.
20. The Contractor is responsible for confirming that system shutdowns result in isolation of the mains affected and that pressure in the affected mains has been properly released.
21. The Contractor shall not be entitled to compensation for delays or rescheduling of work that may arise due to problems the City may encounter with existing valves while attempting to isolate a section(s) of pipe during the shutdown. This includes the scheduled day for shutdown as well as the time that it takes for the City to repair or replace the inoperable valves. The Contractor may, however, be entitled to an extension of contract completion time because of the delay, as approved by the Engineer. The Contractor will be encouraged to work on other areas of the project so as not to disrupt their work.
22. NOTIFICATION OF CUSTOMERS 2. The Contractor shall notify all water customers/consumers 72 hours in advance prior to disrupting their water service. The Contractor will furnish and distribute City approved door-knob handout cards for distribution to customers affected by shutdowns. The Contractor shall also verbally inform customers affected by shutdowns. Water service disruption includes but is not limited to those times when:
23. The customer’s water service is switched over to the temporary by-pass piping;
24. The main is first shut down after the temporary by-pass piping has become fully operational;
25. The customer’s water service is switched back to the main from the temporary by-pass;
26. Water mains are shut down for cut-ins; and
27. Any other situation that cause the water service to be disrupted.
28. Connection to Existing Facilities 3. Contractor may proceed with excavation only when the all proceeding procedures (all utility verification, system shutdown and customer notifications) have been completed, materials have been approved and delivered, and a copy of the approved traffic control plan (if not included in the Approved Plans) has been supplied to the City Engineer.
29. The Contractor shall saw-cut pavement, excavate and provide and install shoring and steel plating, when necessary, one day prior to the cut-in installation.
30. The Contractor shall provide lights, barricades and traffic control devices in accordance with the City’s Representative and as deemed necessary for the excavation by the City Engineer.
31. The Contractor shall de-water existing mains in full compliance with NPDES standards where cut-in installations are required and shall be done in the presence of the Engineer and in accordance with Section 02223. The Contractor shall be prepared to deal with leaking valves and water from those valves to complete the shutdown. Only City personnel are authorized to operate existing valves. The Contractor shall be responsible for any and all damage resulting from unauthorized operation of existing City facilities.
32. In areas where cut-ins are to be performed the Contractor shall line the bottom of the trench with 300 to 450mm (12” to 18”) of 19mm (¾”) rock and install a 300 to 400mm (12” to 16”) deep sump for dewatering the trench bottom.
33. To facilitate the proposed connection and allow for slight adjustments in alignment, the Contractor shall leave a minimum 3.0m (10’) gap between the new pipe installation and the proposed connection point at the existing water main. The Contractor shall leave a gap longer than 3.0m (10’) if conditions warrant, or if directed by the City Engineer.
34. Connections shall be made with as little change as possible in the grade of the new main. If the grade of the existing pipe is below that of the new pipeline, a sufficient length of the new line shall be deepened so as to prevent the creation of any high spot or abrupt changes in grade of the new line. Where the grade of the existing pipe is above that of the new pipeline, the new line shall be laid at specified depth, except for the first joint adjacent to the connection, which shall be deflected within 75% of the allowances of the pipe manufacturer as necessary to meet the grade of the existing pipe. If sufficient change in direction cannot be obtained by the limited deflection of the first joint, a fitting of the proper angle shall be installed. Where the connection creates a high or low spot in the line, a standard air release or blow off assembly shall be installed as directed by the City Engineer.
35. Where connections are made to existing valves, the contractor shall furnish and install all temporary blocking, steel clamps, shackles, and anchors as required by the City, and he shall replace the valve riser box and cover and adjust the valve cover to the proper grade in accordance with these specifications. The City will operate all existing valves. All valves, existing or newly installed, shall be readily accessible at all times to the City for emergency operation.
36. After the Contractor has performed the cut-in operations, and the City Engineer has given approval to proceed, the Contractor shall complete the installation as shown on the Approved Plans in accordance with the Standard Specifications including, but not limited to: 1. Disinfecting and installing the pipe section(s) necessary to make the closure to the new system. New pipelines shall not be connected to existing facilities until new pipelines have been successfully tested and disinfected and accepted by the City. 1. Installing and setting the valve gate well(s) in accordance with the Standard Drawings. 2. Installing thrust and anchor blocks in accordance with Section 03000. 3. Completing all backfill and compaction of the trench in accordance with Section 02223. 4. Repairing or replacing pavement as necessary in accordance with agency of jurisdiction requirements.
37. INSTALLATION OF TEMPORARY END CAPS TO MAINTAIN SERVICE 5. Before excavating for new mains that are to replace existing pipes or services, it may be necessary to install temporary or permanent end caps or blind flanges on existing pipes that are later to be abandoned or connected to in order to maintain service to customers or fire protection during construction. When indicated on the Approved Plans or when directed by the City Engineer, Contractor shall install and maintain such temporary end caps as indicated below and in accordance with the Standard Drawings. 6. For existing water mains 350mm (14”) or less in diameter, the existing pipe shall be cut cleanly and fitted with a rubber-gasketed ductile-iron solid end cap specifically designed for the size and type of pipe being temporarily capped. The temporary end cap shall be adequately braced with a concrete thrust block poured against undisturbed material or as otherwise required to insure that no movement or leakage occurs.
38. Temporary end caps shall be fitted with 50mm (2”) tapped outlets in accordance with the Standard Drawings to provide temporary 50mm (2”) blowoffs or connections to temporary water sources if indicated on the Approved Drawings or if directed by the City Engineer.
39. Existing pipes 400mm (16”) or larger shall not be fitted with temporary end caps.
40. UTILITIES CROSSING WATER, RECYCLED WATER OR SEWER FACILITIES 7. Wherever new utilities cross under or over water, recycled water or sewer facilities, the minimum vertical separation shall be 300mm (12”) unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. The new pipeline shall be restrained in accordance with the Approved Plans. All new utilities crossing under or over water, recycled water or sewer facilities shall remain exposed until inspected and approved by the City’s Representative. Wherever new utilities cross under or over water, recycled water or sewer facilities, backfill and compaction within the limits of the water, recycled water, or sewer facility trench width shall be in strict conformance with the backfill and compaction requirements specified herein.
41. HORIZONTAL SEPARATION OF UTILITIES PARALLELING WATER, RECYCLED WATER OR SEWER FACILITIES
42. Wherever new utilities parallel water, storm drain, recycled water or sewer facilities, the minimum horizontal separation shall be per the California Department of Health Services separation requirements unless otherwise approved by the City’s Representative.
43. Removal from Service of Existing Mains and Appurtenances

    6. Existing mains and appurtenances shall be removed from service at the locations shown on the plans or as directed by the engineer.
    7. Existing pipe and appurtenances removed from the ground will require backfill and repair of surface in accordance with Section 02223.
    8. Removed pipe and appurtenances shall be temporarily stockpiled on the job in a location that will not disrupt traffic or be a safety hazard, disposed of in a proper manner (as determined by the City Engineer). The contractor shall remove and dispose of all removed pipe at his own expense to a landfill permitted to accept such materials.
    9. Before excavating for installing mains that are to replace existing pipes and/or services, the contractor shall make proper provisions for the maintenance and continuation of service as directed by the City Engineer unless otherwise specified.
    10. If the meter box is to be removed from an abandoned water service, the service line is to be removed and the corporation stop closed and capped. If there is no corporation stop on the service, the adapter is to be removed and a brass plug is to be installed in the service saddle.
    11. Asbestos Cement Pipe (ACP) shall be cut, removed and disposed of in a proper manner. The contractor shall be responsible for the proper manifesting of any and all ACP at an authorized disposal site.

44. Cutting and Restoring Street Surfacing 12. In cutting or breaking up street surfacing, the contractor shall not use equipment that will damage adjacent pavement. 13. All asphalt and/or Portland cement concrete surfaces shall be scored with sawing equipment of a type meeting the approval of the City; providing however, that any cement concrete base under an asphaltic mix surface will not be required to be scored by sawing. Existing paving surfaces shall be saw cut back beyond the edges of the trenches to form neat square cuts before repaving is commenced. 14. The Contractor is required to visit all project locations prior to bid. City records indicate that the existing structural sections vary as follows:
    1. Roadway Description
45. Estimated Structural Section
46. PCC Concrete Pavement
47. 12” +/-
48. AC Pavement
49. 3” + 1” over four-inch aggregate base + 1”
50. The Contractor will be provided additional pavement information once it becomes available.
51. Pavement, sidewalks, curbs, or gutters removed or destroyed in connection with performance of the work shall be saw cut to the nearest score marks, if any, and shall be replaced with pavement sidewalks, curbs, or gutters of the same kind, or better by the contractor in accordance with the latest specifications, rules, and regulations and subject to the inspection of the agency having jurisdiction over the street or highway.
52. One sack cement slurry base shall be placed beneath the restored pavement to the thickness required by the agency having to allow the restoration of the pavement.
53. MAINTENANCE, REMOVAL, AND RECONSTRUCTION OF UTILITIES AND OTHER FACILITIES 17. Insofar as practicable during the progress of the work, no pipeline, conduit, sewer, culvert, storm drain, drainage channel, pole line, street lighting system, overhead wires or cables, or underground wires or cables, either main line structures or laterals and services, or any other structure or facility, shall be disturbed, but all shall be supported and protected against injury and maintained by the Contractor in good operating condition. In no case shall any such property be disturbed or removed without the approval of the Engineer as hereinafter provided. The Contractor shall be responsible for and make good all damage due to his/her operations and the provisions of this section shall not be abated even in the event such damage occurs after backfilling or is not discovered until after completion of backfilling. 18. All affected traffic signal materials or equipment as a result of this improvement shall be restored or replaced by the Contractor at no cost to the City. This includes pull boxes, inductive loop detectors, detectors, lead-in wire, and interconnect cable, etc. 19. Where a pipe fitting or portion of the pipe is to be removed near a valve, and the valve is to be left in place as a stop against main pressure, the valve shall be tied back by the Contractor to the satisfaction of the Engineer. Any damage which might result to the City’s property as a result of a main break caused by inadequate restraint of the valve will be charged to the Contractor.
