---
title: Monorail Hoists
section: '412223.19'
divNumb: 41
divName: Material Processing and Handling
subgroup: Process Equipment
tags: ['Process', 'Equipment', 'Material', 'Processing', 'Handling', 'Monorail', 'Hoists']
---

   1. Section 41 22 23.19 
   1. Monorail Hoists

## General

1. SUMMARY
   1. This section includes:
      1. 
	1. Electric, two-part double-reeved, wire rope trolley hoists.
2. Related Sections:
	1. Section 412213 “Bridge Crane.”
	2. Section 412216 “Jib Crane.”
	3. Drawings, 
	4. General and Special Provisions of the Contract, and 
	5. Division 01 Specification Sections apply to this Section.
	6. QUALITY ASSURANCE
3. The equipment shall be supplied by a firm regularly engaged in the manufacture of the equipment item, whose products have been used satisfactorily in similar services for a minimum of five (5) years.
4. The Contractor may furnish and install equipment of a manufacturer whose products have not been in similar services for five years, provided the equipment manufacturer submits a bond, or deposits a sum equal to the installed price of the equipment, for a period of five (5) years.
	1. SUBMITTALS
5. Submit the following in accordance with the Provisions of the Contract and Division 01 Specification Sections:
	1. Manufacturer’s product data
	2. Detailed wirings diagrams
	3. Installation instructions
	4. Parts list
	5. Operation and maintenance manuals
	6. Product warranty
6. Operation and maintenance manuals shall be submitted prior to making application for payment exceeding 75% of the Contract Price.
	1. WARRANTY
7. Special Warranty:
      1. 
	1. The manufacturer shall warrant that the work described shall be free from defects in workmanship and material for a period of two (2) years from the date of acceptance. 
	2. Any faulty workmanship or defective material furnished, found within the warranty period, shall be corrected without cost to the Owner.
   1. Product
1. MANUFACTURERS
   1. Trolley hoists shall be as manufactured by ACCO, or approved equal.
2. EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS
   1. Trolleys
	1. Completely compatible with hoists and monorail shown on Drawings.
	2. Meet NEC standards according to classifications.
	3. Minimum B-10 bearing life of 10,000 HRS based on 75 percent of the wheel load, excluding impact.
	4. Motor driven and operate at a single speed as scheduled. Enclosed internal gears in oiltight housing. Motors to operate on 460 V, 3 phase, 60 cycle power supply.
2. Hoists
	1. Cross-mounted close-headroom electric wire rope hoist models.
	2. Hoist frames of welded steel plate construction.
	3. Oil-tight gear casing for oil bath lubrication of gears.
	4. Construct rope drum and surrounding units to minimize abrading, crushing or jamming of rope during usage.
	5. Drum diameter not less than 18 times the diameter of the rope used.
	6. Assure that two complete wraps of rope remain on the drum after lowering the load hook through its rated lift distance, unless a lower limit device is provided, in which case provide a minimum of one complete wrap.
	7. Double reeving for LL hoists.
	8. Sheave and drum grooves shall be smooth and free from surface irregularities which could cause rope damage.
	9. Provide running sheaves with means for lubrication.
	10. Bearings: Antifriction type, minimum B-10 life of 10,000 hours.
		1. Mechanical load brake.
	11. Lower limit switch to stop hoist when hook reaches its lower limit.
3. Motor:
	1. Motor Brake: Internal disc magnetic type rated for 150 percent of motor torque.
	2. TENV motors operable on 460 V, 3 PH, 60 cycle power.
	3. Meet specified area classification
	4. Permanently lubricate and seal motor ball-bearings
	5. Provide an upper limit switch to stop hoist motor and apply the holding brake
	6. when the hook reaches its upper limit.
	7. Controls: Motor starters, electric conduit, control stations, magnetic reversing contactors and low-voltage transformer, necessary for a complete and totally functioning conveying system.
	8. Mark the hoist with the following information:
		1. Name and address of manufacturer
		2. Manufacturer’s unit identification number.
		3. Rated load.
		4. Voltage of AC or DC power supply and phase and frequency of AC power supply.
		5. Rated amperage
	9. Hooks: Forged steel, gate or swing type latch hooks, bottom hook to free swivel in the loaded condition without twisting the wire rope.
	10. Sleeve or antifriction type bearings.
	11. Enclose gearing in sealed construction and provide life-time lubrication.
	12. Load limit device to automatically prevent hoist from lifting loads greater than rated capacity.
4. Controls
	1. Pendant pushbutton control stations with reversing type contactors for electric hoists
	2. and trolleys.
	3. Single station if hoist and trolley are both motor-driven.
	4. Suspend control stations from trolleys.
	5. Clearly mark function of each button
	6. Suspend station in a manner that will protect the electrical conductors against strain.
	7. Control station shall be operable from 115 V power supply.
	8. Ground control station to hoist.
	9. Provide control cable lengths of 1 FT less than distance to nearest floor.
	10. Control station shall be NEMA 4X.
5. Chain Hoist and Trolley
	1. Hoist trolley shall be geared trolley type.
	2. Hoist shall include a capacity limiter.
	3. Chain shall be stainless steel.

## Execution


	1. INSPECTION
   1. Examine all equipment at the site to determine that it is in conformance with the contract documents and approved shop drawings, and that it is new, in good condition and capable of the required performance.
2. Examine the installation site, as applicable to determine its suitability and conformance to specifications for the equipment installation.
	1. INSTALLATION
3. Supply all anchor bolts, nuts and washers of stainless-steel material, and install equipment in accordance with the manufacturer's instruction.

