---
title: Jib Cranes
section: '412213.19'
divNumb: 41
divName: Material Processing and Handling
subgroup: Process Equipment
tags:
  [
    'Process',
    'Equipment',
    'Material',
    'Processing',
    'Handling',
    'Jib',
    'Cranes',
  ]
---

## General

1. SUMMARY
   1. This section specifies furnishing, installing and load testing of free standing jib crane complete with hoist, trolley, controls, and electrification at the location shown. Included is all piping, wiring, conduit and switching required to connect the equipment to the building utilities.
   1. Related Work Specified Elsewhere.
   1. Section 033000 - Cast in Place Concrete.
   1. Section 055000- Metal Fabrications.
   1. Division 26- Electrical.
1. QUALITY ASSURANCE
   1. Applicable Standards:
      1. ANSI B30.11, Monorail Systems and Underhung Cranes.
   1. ANSI B30.16, Overhead Hoists.
   1. AWS D14.1, Specifications for Welding Industrial and Mill Cranes.
   1. HMI 100, Standard Specifications for Electric Wire Rope Hoists.
1. SUBMITTALS
   1. Submit the following for approval in accordance with Section 013300.
   1. Shop drawings catalog cuts, manufacturer's installation instructions, and operations and maintenance manuals.
1. VERIFICATION OF DIMENSIONS
   1. Contractor is responsible for coordination and proper relation of all work to the building structure and to the work of all trades. The Contractor shall verify all dimensions of the building that relate to fabrication of the crane and notify the Owner of any discrepancy.
1. CERTIFICATIONS
   1. Submit load test certificate for each electric wire rope hoist which indicates actual breaking strength of the wire rope on the manufacturer's minimum wire rope breaking strength.
1. WARRANTY
   1. Following completion, the manufacturer shall provide the Owner with a one (1) year warranty starting at project acceptance, covering all parts, materials, and labor. All warranty work shall be performed by a local manufacturer's representative at the Project Site location, who has capabilities of responding to all problems within 24 hours. Any shipping and delivery costs associated with the warranty of this equipment will be the responsibility of the Manufacturer.

## Products

1.  MANUFACTURERS
    1.  Products of the following manufacturers are specified herein as the standard of quality for the jib cranes and hoists:
        1. Gorbel, Inc.
    2.  600 Fishers Run
    3.  P.O. Box 593
    4.  Fishers, NY 14453-0593
    5.  Telephone:
        1. (800) 821-0086
    6.  Acco Chain & Lifting Products Division
    7.  76 Acco Drive
    8.  Box 792
    9.  York, PA 17405
    10. Distributed by:
        1. HOJ Engineering and Sales
    11. Salt Lake City, UT 84123
    12. Telephone:
        1. (801) 266-8881
    13. Products of equal quality and utility of the following manufacturers will be accepted:
        1. Abell-Howe Co.
    14. 7747 W. Van Buren
    15. Forest Park, IL 60130
    16. Telephone:
        1. (312) 366-4800
    17. Bushman Equipment, Inc.
    18. P.O. Box 309Butler, WI 53007
    19. Tel:
        1. 262-790-4200
    20. Shaw-Box Hoists
    21. Dresser Industries
    22. Crane and Hoist Division
    23. Muskegon, MI 49443
2.  FREE STANDING JIB CRANE WITH ELECTRIC HOIST
    1.  General:
    2.  Provide a base mounted jib crane with standard headroom cross mounted pendant controlled electric hoist.
    3.  Crane shall be supplied complete with all components and appurtenances required for operation including, but not limited to hoist, motorized trolley, end stops, controls, wiring, electrification, and the control pendant.
    4.  Crane to be provided with motorized rotation.
    5.  Construction Features of the Jib Crane:
        1. Cranes shall be designed to accommodate the hoist specified herein.
    6.  Boom:
        1. Construct in accordance with AISC specifications. Beam deflection not to exceed 1/150 of the span. Base design load for deflection calculation upon the capacity plus 15% for the weight of the hoist and trolley (capacity x 1.15). Provide a selected structural steel member for the boom beam which will provide level and straight tread surfaces for the hoist trolleys. Provide a beam of adequate lateral stiffness with minimum lateral moment of inertia of 1/20 that of the vertical moment of inertia. Reinforce the boom where required.
    7.  Mast:
        1. Construct from structural pipe of a diameter to give a minimum of deflection having a wall thickness (strength) to resist crushing and wear at the lower roller assembly.
    8.  Head Assembly:
        1. Construct of steel plate and design to limit deflection and provide resistance to dislodgement in both outward and upward directions. Attach boom to the jib head front and back through plates and channels which will distribute boom loading forces through reinforcing channels to the lower roll assembly of the head, and through the bearing to the pivot pin on top of the jib mast. Provide an enclosed bottom entrance collector assembly; install in head independently of the boom.
    9.  Bearings:
        1. Boom support top bearing:
           1. Heavy-duty tapered roller bearing with a minimum average life of 10,000 hours. Include provision for a retaining pin in double shear above the top pivot bearing.
    10. Lower roller assembly bearing:
        1. Adjustable with 2 large diameter rollers each having a minimum of 2 heavy-duty roller bearings operating on hardened bolts with pressure grease fittings.
    11. Base Plate:
        1. Solid steel with full web reinforcing gussets supporting the entire base plate and tying same into the masts. Provide a minimum of six gussets and either 6 or 12 anchor bolts properly spaced to furnish a minimum of forces being exerted on the concrete foundation.
    12. Construction Features of the Hoist:
        1. Design Criteria:
           1. HMI - "H3" Service Classification.
    13. Cross mounted, standard headroom wire rope electric hoist shall be equipped with motorized trolley.
    14. Motor:
        1. TENV squirrel cage type variable speed motor, 30 minute duty rated with Class B insulation in a NEMA frame and shall be NEMA rated for crane/hoist duty. Equip motor with standard NEMA shaft extension.
    15. Controls:
        1. Magnetic reversing type controls, mechanically and electrically interlocked with 115 volt control circuit. Wiring in accordance with National Electrical Code requirements. Provide time delay fuses for branch circuit over current protection and thermal overload relays in three phases for motor running over-current protection. Use NEMA Type 12 enclosures.
    16. Frame:
        1. Rigid welded steel unit construction which shall insure permanency of alignment and quiet operation and form a dust and moisture-resistant enclosure.
    17. Rope Drum:
        1. Fabricate of hot-rolled steel. Machine cut rope grooves to exceed established minimum standards for pitch and depth. Retain a minimum of two full rope turns on the drum when the hook is in its low position.
    18. Wire Rope:
        1. Extra-improved plow steel with independent wire rope center, IWRC 6 x 37 with certification; (IWRC) preformed and swaged at both ends.
    19. Load Block:
        1. Shrouded steel load-block frame. Rope sheaves and load hook shall operate on anti-friction bearings. Hood shall be drop forged heat treated steel, shall swivel freely through 360 degrees rotation and shall be furnished with a spring type safety latch.
    20. Bearings:
        1. Precision heavy-duty ball bearings either splash lubricated, or lifetime pre-lubricated and sealed.
    21. Gear Train:
        1. 3 stage reduction combination helical and spur gearing enclosed in oil-tight housing. Machine cut, heat-treated alloy steel gearing designed to AGMA standards for maximum life operating in an oil bath.
    22. Lubrication:
        1. Enclose gear train in an oil-tight case with sufficient reservoir to ensure proper lubrication and cooling. Provide permanent-sealed type lubrication for all other bearings.
    23. Mechanical Load Brake:
        1. Multiple disc automatic Weston-type brake, capable of holding full load independently of motor brake and preventing load acceleration when lowering.
    24. Motor Brake:
        1. DC rectified magnetic released direct acting disc-type brake with minimum torque rating of 150% of motor torque. Adjustable to compensate for lining wear without disassembling the brake. Capable of holding full load independently of mechanical load brake.
    25. Limit Switches:
        1. Overload cutoff device:
           1. Provide electro-mechanical type overload switch to interrupt the hoist raising circuit when loads greater than rated loads are lifted. Lowering circuit shall not be affected.
    26. Upper limit switches:
        1. Provide a block actuated weight type upper limit switch equipped to "reverse plug" the hoist downward in the event of hook over travel.
    27. General limit switch:
        1. Provide a 2 element field adjustable upper and lower hook travel limit switch.
    28. Motorized Hoist Trolleys:
        1. Provide motorized trolley of all steel construction with wheel gauges factory set for each individual hoist application.
    29. Wheels:
        1. Provide forged steel wheels with hardened treads in sufficient capacity and quantity for each application.\
    30. Bearings:
        1. Provide single row anti-friction ball bearings for all wheels. Bearings shall have a B-10 bearing life at 5,000 hours.
    31. Trolley Drive:
        1. Provide each hoist with at least two driving wheels through a worm gear reducer.
    32. Trolley Motor:
        1. TENV single speed motor with 30 minute rating and Class F insulation. Motors shall have standard NEMA frames and shaft extensions and rated for crane/hoist duty.
    33. Controls:
        1. Single or two speed reversing type with solid state reduced voltage starter.
    34. Push button Station:
        1. Pendant type:
           1. Provide a 4 button station to control hoist for each crane. Clearly mark the function of each pushbutton. Hoist suspended momentary contact type pushbuttons in a NEMA type 12 enclosure. The bottom of the pendant control shall be located 4 feet above the floor.
    35. Provide cable management system along trolley travel.
    36. Provide visual indicator for path of travel for jib and trolley.
    37. Hoist Power Supply:
    38. 480 volts, 3 phase, 60 hertz.
    39. Jib Crane Characteristics:
    40. Mounting Style:
        1.  FS300.
    41. Jib Crane and Hoist capacity:
    42. 10 ton.
    43. Height under boom:
    44. 20 feet.
    45. Span:
    46. 15 feet.
    47. Depth of Boom:
    48. 24 inches.
    49. Mast diameter:
    50. 36 inches.
    51. Rotation:
    52. 180 degree swing (approximate).
    53. Hoist Lift:
    54. 12 feet, (approximate).
    55. Hoist Lift Speeds:
    56. 20 FPM (approximate), single-speed.
    57. Hoist motor horsepower (approximate) 2.5 HP.
    58. Motorized Trolley.
    59. Jib crane shall be Model No. FS300DD-36-W24MC18 as manufactured by Gorbel or equal with the above minimum requirements.
    60. Hoist shall be World Series Hoist No. WCM10-025S20-2 motor driven trolley as manufactured by Shaw-Box, or equal with the above minimum requirements.

## Execution

1. INSTALLATION
   1. Install Jib Crane along with required footings as recommended and in strict accordance with the approved shop drawings and manufacturer's installation instructions.
   1. Jib cranes will be load tested by a Certified Inspector provided by the Contractor. Certification must be provided to the Owner for record. Test to 125% of rated capacity.
   1. Field apply rotation stops to prevent rotation into adjacent fixed objects.
   1. Proceed with start-up, testing and instructions in accordance with Section 01750.
   1. Anchor bolts and foundations are included as work of Division 3 - Concrete and Division 5 - Metals.
1. FIELD QUALITY CONTROL
   1. Provide the services of a qualified manufacturer's representative to perform the following:
      1. Supervise preparatory work performed by other trades.
   1. Supervise installation.
   1. Supervise testing, by the Contractor in the presence of the Owner to ensure proper operation of the equipment.
   1. Instruct operating personnel in the proper operation and maintenance of the equipment.
