---
title: Bridge Cranes
section: '412213.13'
divNumb: 41
divName: Material Processing and Handling
subgroup: Process Equipment
tags:
  [
    'Process',
    'Equipment',
    'Material',
    'Processing',
    'Handling',
    'Bridge',
    'Cranes',
  ]
---

## GENERAL

1. SUMMARY
   1. This section includes:
      1. Furnishing, installing and load testing of overhead bridge cranes, complete with hoist, crane and runway at locations indicated on the Contract Drawings.
      2. Provide necessary labor, services, and incidentals required for complete equipment installation.
   2. Related Work Specified Elsewhere:
      1. Section 051200 - Structural Steel Framing.
      2. Division 26 - Electrical.
2. SUBMITTALS
   1. Comply with all pertinent provisions of Section 013300.
   2. Submit shop drawings showing all dimensions, elevations, connections and materials, catalog cuts, and manufacturer’s installation instructions and operation and maintenance manuals within sixty (60) days of the first job meeting.
3. QUALITY ASSURANCE
   1. Applicable Standards:
      1. ANSI B.30.2.0, Safety Code for Overhead and Gantry Cranes.
      2. ANSI B30.16, Overhead Hoists, Class “C” Service.
      3. AWS D14.1, Specifications for Welding Industrial and Mill Cranes.
      4. HMI “H3” service classifications.
4. WARRANTY
   1. Following completion, the manufacturer shall provide Owner with a Two (2) year warranty starting at project acceptance, covering all parts, materials, and labor.
   2. All warranty work shall be performed by as local manufacturer’s representative at the Project Site location, who has capabilities of responding to all problems within 24 hours.
   3. Any shipping and delivery costs associated with the warranty of this equipment will be the responsibility of the Manufacturer.

## Product

1.  GENERAL
    1. Design all material with a minimum safety factor of 5 based on the ultimate strength of the material
    2. Include an impact factor of 15 percent of the full live-load rated capacity of hoists in design calculations for track, suspension fittings, carriers, tractor drives, bridge trucks and loadings imposed on support structure.
    3. Select crane bridge girder for maximum deflection of 1/800 of bridge span.
    4. Select crane runway beams for maximum deflection of 1/450 of runway span.
    5. Dampen end stop impact by use of bumpers.
2.  TOP RUNNING CRANE
    1. Top running crane and crane system components:
       1. Crane rail and crane rail support beams mounted on columns, runway conductors, carrier, hoist, end stops, and crane operating on the overhead track.
    2. Crane runway and crane rail to be on support columns provided under Division 5, as an independent structure designed for the crane and bridge and illustrated on structural drawings.
3.  10-TON BRIDGE CRANES WITH HOIST
    1.  Acceptable Manufacturer:
        1. Products of the following manufacturer are specified herein as the standard of quality for the 10 Ton Bridge Crane with Hoist.
        2. Konecranes
           1. Distributed by:
           2. HOJ Engineering and Sales
           3. Salt Lake City, UT 84123
           4. Telephone: (801) 266-8881
           5. Products of equal quality and utility of the following manufacturer will be accepted.
        3. Wazee Crane
           1. Santa Fe Dr.
           2. Denver, Co. 80223
           3. 1-800-624-1736
        4. Philadelphia Tramrail Overhead Crane Division
           1. 2207 E. Ontario Street
           2. Philadelphia, PA 19134
           3. Telephone: (800) 523-3651
        5. Shepard Niles Inc./Cleveland Tramrail
           1. 250 N. Genesee Street
           2. Montour Falls, NY 14865
           3. Telephone: (607)535-7111
        6. Acco Babcock, Inc.
           1. Chain and Lifting Products Division,
           2. 76 Acco Drive, Box 792,
           3. York, PA 17405
           4. Low Headroom, Trolley Mounted Electric Hoists.
    2.  Design Requirements:
        1. Motor:
        2. Class F insulation rated at 30 minutes and operate on 3 phase, 60 cycles, 460 volts AC with 110 volts in the control circuit. Squirrel cage TENV, 2 speed motor.
    3.  Frame:
        1. Rigid welded steel unit construction which shall insure permanency of alignment and quiet operation and form a dust add moisture-resistant enclosure.
    4.  Rope Drum:
        1. Fabricate of hot-rolled steel.
        2. Machine cut rope grooves to exceed established minimum standards for pitch and depth.
        3. Retain a minimum of two full rope turns on the drum when the hook is in lowered position.
    5.  Wire Rope:
        1. Extra-improved plow steel with independent wire rope center. (IWRC) preformed and internally lubricated.
    6.  Controls:
        1. Magnetic controls in accordance with latest NEMA and NEC specifications. Provide load-limiting device.
    7.  Hook:
        1. Hook shall swivel freely through 360 degrees rotation and shall be furnished with a hook latch.
    8.  Limit Switches:
        1. Gravity-type hook travel plus upper and lower geared limit.
    9.  Gear Train:
        1. 3 stage reduction combination helical and spur gearing enclosed in oil-tight housing. Machine cut; heat-treated alloy steel gearing designed to AGMA standards for maximum life; operating in an oil bath.
    10. Lubrication:
        1. Enclose gear train in an oil-tight case with sufficient reservoir to ensure proper oil bath lubrication and cooling. Provide permanent-seal type lubrication for all other bearings.
    11. Motor Brake:
        1. Magnet actuated disc brake separated from gear housing for rapid cooling and rated a minimum of 150% of full load motor torque. 20. HMI H3 service classification.
    12. Hoist Characteristics:
        1. Capacity: 20,000 pounds.
    13. Hoist Control:
        1. Variable speed.
    14. Motor:
        1. 10 to 15 horsepower TENV/TEFC
    15. Lift and Speed:
        1. 20 feet at 20/3.3 fpm (approx.).
    16. Cable and Reeving:
        1. 1/2-inch diameter cable, 4-part single reeving.
    17. Trolley:
        1. ½ HP, 65 fpm travel (stepless) VFD.
    18. Hook Height:
        1. 20 ft. minimum
    19. Electric Wire Rope Hoist with Motorized Trolley shall meet the above minimum requirements.
    20. Crane Characteristics:
        1. 10-ton rated load, single girder, motor propelled crane, approximate 25-foot overall span, to be verified per Contract Drawing.
    21. Design Requirements and Construction Features:
    22. End Trucks:
        1. End trucks each having two-wheel assemblies with double flanged wheels running on double row tapered roller bearings.
    23. Crane controls with travel rate of 100 fpm (stepless).
    24. Include the following:
        1. NEMA Type 3R gasketed enclosure.
        2. Manual disconnect switch with fuse protection. Switch operable by handle on enclosure cover; handle capable of being padlocked in "OFF" position.
        3. Mainline contactor operated by momentary contact push buttons in the crane control station.
        4. 150 VA transformer with fused secondary.
        5. Thermal overload relays in 3 phases.
    25. Bridge motors:
        1.  2 HP each (approx.).
    26. Push Button Enclosure:
        1.  Pendant type, push button station with momentary contact type pushbuttons in a molded rubber or high impact plastic enclosure suspended from carrier. Provide an 8-button station to control hoist and crane.
        2.  Cranes shall be a top running, 10-ton capacity, single girder bridge crane with the above minimum requirements.
    27. Runway:
        1.  Provide crane runway track (per Contract Drawing). Provide required splice plates and end stops. Provide crane runway end stops, as recommended by manufacturer, at each end of runway, at location designated by the Officer in Charge. Crane runaway beams shall be mounted to the top of crane columns as shown in the structural drawings. Crane rail shall be attached to top of crane beam.
        2.  Provide electrification on one beam of runway consisting of Figure 8 conductor bar including required brackets, power feeds, collectors, and end covers.
4.  ACCESSORIES
    1. Anchors and Accessories:
    2. Manufacturer's standard units.
    3. Use galvanized items for units built into exterior walls, complying with ASTM A153.
    4. Provide visual indicator for direction of travel of bridge and trolley.
5.  FABRICATION
    1. Fabricate units to be rigid, neat in appearance and free from defects, warp or buckle.
    2. Weld exposed joints continuously, grid, dress, and make smooth, flush and invisible.
    3. Metallic filler to conceal manufacturer's defects is not acceptable.

## Execution

1. INSTALLATION
   1. Install equipment in strict accordance with the approved shop drawings and manufacturer's installation instructions.
   2. Electrical Interface:
      1. Power supply for equipment is designed as 460 volts, 3-phase, 60 hertz.
      2. Provide transformers for equipment as required to step down the specified supply voltage to provide lower voltage for controls and accessories and to provide voltage compatible with equipment as required.
      3. Provide wiring and conduit for a complete installation and proper operation of all equipment and accessories. Provide electrical service devices (disconnect switches) complying with the requirements of Division 16 - Electrical. As work of this Contract, install these electrical service devices, perform wiring (including conduit installation) and make connections between these electrical service devices and equipment specified. Size wiring and conduits for the loads and voltages indicated on the Drawings. Wiring and conduits types shall be in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code of the individual equipment location except where more stringent requirements are specified in Division 16. In no case shall maximum current carried exceed that specified by the National Electrical Code for type of conductor used.
      4. Provide disconnect switches (fused and non-fused as required), motor starters and start-stop control stations for all equipment subject to the following conditions:
         1. Provide above stated electrical devices consistent with both National Electrical Code and equipment design requirements, as well as the electrical power circuit design for each piece of equipment.
         2. Provide the type of electrical device based on the requirements of the preceding paragraph and the electrical characteristics of the project electrical design.
   3. Sizing of the above stated electrical devices is the responsibility of the Contractor based on the information supplied by equipment manufactures and is subject to the Project Manager's approval.
   4. Provide control devices necessary for proper operation and locate to permit efficient operation of the equipment, and where possible group in a factory-fabricated control panel meeting NEMA requirements.
   5. Bridge crane shall have no exposed conductors in the electrification system.
   6. Proceed with start-up, testing and instructions in accordance with Section 017500. Testing shall be performed by a Certified Inspector in the State of Colorado and must perform all required tests including as follows:
   7. No-Load Test:
      1. Hoist:
         1. Raise each load hook into the hoist limit switch at slow operating speed. Lower and raise each hook through all controller points.
      2. Trolley:
         1. Push trolley the full distance of the bridge rails and observe proper brake operations.
      3. Bridge:
         1. Push the bridge the full distance of the bridge rails and observe operations.
   8. Full Rated Load Test:
      1. Tests to be 125% of rated capacity.
      2. Hoist:
   9. Static Test:
      1. Raise test load approximately one foot and hold for ten minutes. Observe lowering that may occur which will indicate malfunction of hoisting components or brakes.
   10. Dynamic Test:
       1. Hoist and lower test load through all controller points. Lower the test load to the ground until hoist lines are slack. Wait five minutes, hoist and lower test load again through controller points.
   11. During either the static or dynamic test, visually observe hoist brakes to ensure correct operation including the proper time delay.
   12. Loss of Power Test:
       1. This test is designed to test the reaction of the hoisting unit in the event of power of power failure during a lift. Hoist the test load to convenient distance above the surface. Lower test load at slow speed and with the controller in the slow lowering position disconnect the main power source and return the controller to the neutral position. The test load should stop lowering when the controller is placed in the neutral position.
   13. Trolley Motion:
       1. Push trolley with test load (if space is available) the full distance of the bridge rails using extreme caution and observe any binding of bridge trucks and for proper operation.
   14. Bridge Motion:
       1. Push bridge with test load the full distance of the runway using extreme caution and observe for any binding of bridge trucks and for proper operations.
   15. Paint:
       1. The bridge cranes before shipment shall be painted with one coat of manufacturers standard rust inhibiting paint.
       2. All marred or damaged surfaces shall be touched up or refinished so as to leave a smooth, uniform finish at the time of final inspection.
2. FIELD QUALITY CONTROL
   1. Upon completion of installation, the crane system shall be tested in accordance with the tests listed in Article 3.1.C.
   2. Provide the services of a qualified manufacturer’s representative to perform the following:
      1. Inspect and approve installation of crane and components prior to testing.
      2. Supervise testing, by the Contractor in the presence of the Officer in Charge, to ensure proper operation of the equipment
      3. Instruct the operating personnel in the proper safe operation and maintenance of the equipment.
