---
title: Disinfection of Water Utility Piping Systems
section: '330110.58'
divNumb: 33
divName: Utilities
subgroup: Site and Infrastructure
tags: ['Site', 'Infrastructure', 'Utilities', 'Disinfection', 'Water', 'Utility', 'Piping', 'Systems']
navigation:
  key: Disinfection of Water Utility Piping Systems
  parent: Utilities
  order: 110.58
---

1. SECTION 15041
1. DISINFECTION OF PIPING
1. 
General
01. DESCRIPTION
   1. This section describes requirements for disinfection by chlorination of potable and recycled water mains, services, pipe appurtenances and connections.
02. REFERENCED STANDARDS
   1. The publications listed below form part of this specification to the extent referenced and are referred to in the text by the basic designation only. Reference shall be made to the latest edition of said standards unless otherwise called for.
   1. AWWA B300 – Hypochlorites
   1. AWWA B301 - Liquid Chlorine
   1. AWWA C651 - Disinfecting Water Mains
   1. APHA, AWWA and WEF Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater
03. RELATEDWORK SPECIFIED ELSEWHERE
   1. Standard Drawings
2. Standard Specifications 01000, 01045, 01200, 01310, 01330, 01505, 01510, 01570, 02140, 02222, 02223, 02511, 02528, 02578, 03000, 03480, 03482, 09902, 09910, and Division 15.
04. SERVICE APPLICATION
   1. All water mains and appurtenances taken out of service for inspection, repairs, or other activity that might lead to contamination shall be disinfected before they are returned to service.
   1. All new water mains and temporary pipelines shall be disinfected prior to connection to the City’s existing system.
   1. All components incorporated into a connection to the City’s existing system shall be disinfected prior to installation.
05. SUBMITTALS
   1. A written disinfection and dechlorination plan, including all methods and equipment to be used for water conveyance, control, disinfection and de-chlorination, shall be signed by the person responsible for performing the work and shall be submitted to the City Engineer a minimum of five (5) working days in advance for approval prior to starting disinfection operations.
06. DELIVERY, STORAGE AND HANDLING
   1. Chlorination and dechlorination shall be performed by certified, competent individuals knowledgeable and experienced in the operation of the necessary application and safety equipment in accordance with applicable Federal, State and Local laws and regulations. The transport, storage and handling of these materials shall be performed in accordance with Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 1910.120 Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency Response, CFR 49.172 Hazardous Materials Regulations, and the General Industry Safety Orders of the California Code of Regulations, Title 8, Section 5194.
07. CONCURRENT DISINFECTION AND HYDROSTATIC TESTING
   1. The specified disinfection of the pipelines may *not* be performed concurrently with the hydrostatic testing in accordance with Section 15044.
08. CONNECTION TO EXISTING MAINS
   1. Prior to connection to existing mains, disinfection and bacteriological testing shall be performed in accordance with this specification, and hydrostatic testing shall be performed per Section 15044. City authorization for connection to the existing system shall be given only on the basis of acceptable hydrostatic, disinfection and bacteriological test results. Connection to existing mains shall be performed in accordance with Section 15000.
1. PART 2 MATERIALS
1. 2.01 LIQUID CHLORINE (GAS)
   1. Liquid chlorine contains 100-percent available chlorine and is packaged in steel containers in net weights of 68.1kg (150 lb.) or 907.2kg (1 ton).
   1. Liquid chlorine shall be used in accordance with the requirements of ANSI/AWWA B301. The appropriate gas flow chlorinators, heaters, and injectors shall be used to provide a controlled, high-concentration solution feed to the water. The chlorinators and injectors shall be the vacuum-operated type. 

* 
	1.  **SODIUM HYPOCHLORITE (LIQUID)
   1. Sodium hypochlorite is available in liquid form in glass or plastic containers, ranging in size from 0.95 L (1 Qt.) to 18.93 L (5 Gal). The solution contains approximately 10% to 20% available chlorine.
2. Sodium Hypochlorite shall be used in accordance with the requirements of ANSI/AWWA B3000, and shall be diluted in water to a known concentration in a container and pumped into the pipeline at a measured rate.
1. 2.03 TABLET OR GRANULAR HYPOCHLORITE
   1. Tablet or granular hypochlorite shall not be used at any time.
1. 2.04 CHLORINE TEST KITS
   1. For measuring chlorine concentration, a medium range, drop count, titration kitor indicator comparator with wide range color discs shall be used. The kit shall be capable of determining chlorine concentration in the range of 1.0 to 25 mg/l. Test kits shall be Hach, Hellige or approved equal. An adequate number of kits shall be maintained by the Contractor in good working order and available for immediate test of residuals at points of sampling.
1. 
Execution
1. 3.01 GENERAL
   1. Disinfection of pipelines shall not proceed until all appurtenances and any necessary sample ports have been installed and the City Engineer provides authorization.
   1. Every effort shall be made to keep the water main and its appurtenances clean and dry during the installation process.
   1. All piping, valves, fittings, and appurtenances which become contaminated during installation shall be cleaned, rinsed with potable water, and then sprayed or swabbed with a 5 percent sodium hypochlorite disinfecting solution prior to installation.
   1. Water mains under construction that become flooded by storm water, runoff, or ground water shall be cleaned by draining and flushing with metered potable water until clear water is evident. Upon completion, the entire main shall be disinfected using a method approved by the City Engineer.
1. 3.02 METHODS
   1. Liquid Chorine (Gas)
1. Only vacuum-operated equipment shall be used. Direct-feed chlorinators, which operate solely from gas pressure in the chlorine cylinder, shall not be permitted. The equipment shall incorporate a Reduced Pressure Principal Backflow Assembly at the point of connection to the potable water source used to fill the line being tested.
2. The chlorinating agent shall be applied at the beginning of the system to be chlorinated and shall be injected through a corporation stop, a hydrant, or other approved connection to ensure treatment of the entire system being disinfected.
3. Only a certified, licensed chlorination and testing contractor shall perform gas chlorination work. The chlorination contractor must also possess a Grade II Treatment Plant Operator Certification from the State of California if required by the City Engineer.
   1. Sodium Hypochlorite Solution (Liquid)
1. Sodium hypochlorite solution shall be used for cleaning and swabbing piping and appurtenances immediately prior to installation and for disinfecting all components of connections to the City’s existing system.
2. Sodium hypochlorite solution may be used for the initial disinfection of newly installed water mains. The solution shall be applied at the lowest point and/or at a terminus of the system to be chlorinated using an injector which can adjust the amount of solution being injected into the piping system. The solution shall be injected in the appropriate concentration to achieve the specified concentration range of chlorine throughout the entire piping system. Where pumping equipment is used in conjunction with an injector, a Reduced Pressure Principal Backflow Assembly shall be installed and connected to the potable water supply.
3. Water trucks, pumping equipment, piping, appurtenances and all other equipment in contact with potable water shall be disinfected prior to use.
4. Sodium hypochlorite solution may also be used to increase the total chlorine residual if the concentration from the initial chlorination of the system is found to be low. The solution shall be added to the system in sufficient amounts at appropriate locations to insure that the disinfecting solution is present at a concentration within the specified range throughout the piping system.
1. 3.03 PROCEDURE FOR DISINFECTING WATER MAINS AND APPURTENANCES
   1. Prior to disinfection, new pipelines shall be drained as directed by the City Engineer. The pipeline shall then be filled with potable water at a rate not to exceed 1,135 liters per minute (300 GPM) or a velocity of 0.3m per second (1 foot per second), whichever is less, and then flushed at a minimum velocity of 0.76 meters per second (2.5 feet per second) until the turbidity level of the water in the new pipeline(s) is less than or equal to 0.5 NTU or is equal in turbidity to the source water, if the source water turbidity is greater than 0.5 NTU.
1. Chlorine solution shall be applied at the lowest elevation and/or at the beginning of the section to be chlorinated and shall be injected through a corporation stop, a hydrant, or other approved connection to ensure treatment of the entire system being disinfected. All required corporation stops and other plumbing materials necessary for chlorination or flushing of the main shall be installed by the Contractor. Care shall be taken to expel air from the pipeline and services during the filling operation.
2. Potable water shall be introduced into the pipeline at a constant measured rate. Chlorine solution shall be injected into the potable feed water at a measured rate. The two rates shall be proportioned so that an initial total chlorine concentration of 50-100 mg/l is evenly distributed throughout the system to be disinfected.
   1. All valves shall be operated with the disinfection solution present in the pipeline. All appurtenances such as air-vacuum relief valves, blowoffs, hydrants, backflow prevention devices, and water service laterals shall be flushed with the treated water a sufficient length of time to insure a chlorine concentration within the specified range in all components of each appurtenance. (Note the limitations for discharge of chlorinated water outlined below.)
   1. The City Engineer will verify the presence of the disinfection solution throughout the system by sampling and testing for acceptable chlorine concentrations at the various appurtenances and/or at the test ports provided by the Contractor. Areas of the system found to be below the specified chlorine concentration level shall receive additional flushing as noted above and/or additional disinfection solution as necessary. (Note the limitations for discharge of chlorinated water outlined below.) Addition of disinfection solution after the initial charging of the line shall be made by either the liquid chlorine (gas) method, or the sodium hypochlorite method as directed by the City Engineer.
1. The chlorinated water shall be retained in the system for a minimum of 24 hours. The City Engineer will test the total chlorine residual at the pipeline extremities and at other representative points. The system shall contain a chlorine residual of not less than25 mg/l. 
2. The disinfection procedure shall be repeated if the chlorine residual is less than 25 mg/l after 24 hrs. The Contractor shall be responsible for all costs of re-disinfection due to test failure, without additional cost to the City.
   1. Following a successful retention period as determined by the City Engineer, the chlorinated water shall be flushed from the system at its extremities and at each appurtenance, using potable water from a source designated by the City Engineer. The minimum water velocity during flushing shall be 0.76 meters per second (2.5 feet per second) or as directed by the City Engineer. Flushing shall continue until the replacement water in the new system is equal in chlorine residual to the potable source of supply and the turbidity level is 0.5 NTU’s or less or as otherwise directed by the City Engineer. (Note the limitations for discharge of chlorinated water outlined below).
   1. The City Engineer will perform bacteriological sampling and testing as specified herein.
1. 3.04 DISCHARGE OF CHLORINATED WATER
   1. Disposal or discharge of water containing residual chlorine is strictly prohibited and subject to local and State fines as describe in the General MS4 permit. Discharge may be allowed to the sewer system if only approved by the City Engineer.
2. Contractor shall perform dechlorination prior to discharge of any water. Dechlorination shall be done in accordance with the *A.W.W.A. Guidelines for the Development of Your Best Management (BMP) Manual of Drinking Water System Releases (2014)*.
1. 3.05 BACTERIOLOGICAL TESTING
   1. After disinfection has been performed as detailed herein, the City Engineer will perform bacteriological sampling and testing of all new system installations. The testing methodology employed by the City Engineer shall be as set forth in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste Water" (current edition). 
   1. The City Engineer will collect samples at least 24 hours after final flushing and refilling. At the Contractor’s request, the City Engineer will also collect a set of samples immediately after refilling, but final approval will be based on the results of the samples collected after the 24 hour retention period. The days of the test shall be determined by the City Engineer.
   1. Sample locations shall be determined by the City Engineer and shall be taken through the length of the new pipeline(s) at locations not more than 1,000’ apart. In addition, samples shall be taken at the end of the line and all branches and dead ends.
   1. All samples must pass the following tests:
      1. Total Coliform Bacteria Test:
         1. Results must indicate the absence of Total Coliform Bacteria.
2. Heterotrophic Plate Count (HPC) Test:
      1. No more than 500 colony-forming units allowed in any sample. The requirement for HPC testing may be waived at the sole discretion of the City Engineer.
1. 3.06 RE-DISINFECTION
   1. If any first-day samples fail the Total Coliform Bacteria or HPC Tests, the entire pipeline(s) will be re-flushed by the Contractor and re-sampled on two consecutive days 24 hours apart as specified herein.
   1. If any second-day samples fail the Total Coliform Bacteria or HPC Tests (after passing the first-day tests), the pipeline(s) shall be re-flushed and re-sampled until samples collected after the 24 hour retention period have passed all tests.
   1. If, after the re-flushing procedures described above are performed, the new pipeline(s) continue to fail either the Total Coliform Bacteria or HPC Tests, the pipeline(s) shall be re-disinfected, re-flushed, and re-sampled. These procedures shall continue until satisfactory results are obtained.
   1. All re-disinfection, re-flushing and re-sampling required shall be at the Contractor’s expense.
1. 3.07 CONNECTING NEW PIPELINES TO EXISTING PIPELINES
   1. Upon successful completion of Bacteriological Testing, Contractor shall schedule connections to existing pipelines within (one) 1 working day or as otherwise required by the City Engineer. If the Contractor exceeds the (one) 1 working day time frame to schedule connections to existing pipelines, additional sampling and testing may be required at the discretion of the City Engineer.
   1. Upon completion of connections to existing pipelines, the City may activate and flush the pipeline and again take samples at the discretion of the City Engineer. If samples fail, the City will re-sample at the failed test location(s). If the re-sample does not produce satisfactory results, the newly installed pipeline shall be disconnected from the existing pipeline(s) at the discretion of the City Engineer. The new pipeline shall then be re-disinfected, re-flushed and resampled as specified herein at the Contractor’s expense.
1. 3.08 DISINFECTION AT SHORT-LENGTH TIE-INS
   1. Pipes, fittings, valves and all other components incorporated into connections to the City’s existing system with an assembly length of 10’ or less shall be spray disinfected or swabbed with a liquid chlorine solution in accordance with AWWA C651 and as specified herein. Upon connection to the main, the line shall be flushed and tested as directed by the City Engineer. Failure to pass Bacteriological Testing will require that new facilities be adequately isolated from existing facilities and re-disinfected and re-tested until the new facilities pass the required tests. Costs for additional disinfection, sampling and testing shall be paid for by Contractor. Alternate methods such as "predisinfection" prior to installation in accordance with AWWA C651 may be required at the discretion of the City Engineer.
1. END OF SECTION

