---
title: ABANDONMENT OF PIPELINES
section: '330110.40'
divNumb: 33
divName: Utilities
subgroup: Site and Infrastructure
tags: ['Site', 'Infrastructure', 'Utilities', 'ABANDONMENT', 'OF', 'PIPELINES']
navigation:
  key: ABANDONMENT OF PIPELINES
  parent: Utilities
  order: 110.4
---

   1. SECTION 02222
   1. ABANDONMENT OF PIPELINES
1. 
General
01. DESCRIPTION
   1. This section includes abandonment in place of existing pipelines and manholes, when indicated on the Drawings for abandonment. 
   1. The Contractor shall furnish all materials, labor, supervision, and equipment required for the orderly demolition, abandonment, removal, and/or salvaging of existing structures, piping, valves, fittings, appurtenances, and other equipment, as shown on the drawings and described herein.
02. RELATED WORK SPECIFIED ELSEWHERE
   1. Standard Drawings
2. Standard Specifications 01000, 01045, 01200, 01310, 01330, 01505, 01510, 01570, 02140, 02223, 02511, 02528, 02578, 03000, 03480, 03482, 09902, 09910, and Division 15.
03. REFERENCE STANDARDS
   1. The publications listed below form part of this specification to the extent referenced and are referred to in the text by the basic designation only. Reference shall be made to the latest edition of said standards unless otherwise called for. 
   1. ASTM C150 – Standard Specification for Portland Cement.
2. ASTM C494 – Standard Specification for Chemical Admixture for Concrete.
3. ASTM C618 – Standard Specification for Fly Ash and Raw or Calcinated Natural Pozzolan for use as Mineral Admixture in Portland Cement Concrete.
4. ASTM C940 – Standard test Method for Expansion and Bleeding of Freshly Mixed grout for Replaced Aggregate Concrete in the Laboratory.
5. ASTM C1017 – Standard Specification for Chemical Admixture for Use in Producing Flowing Concrete.
6. ASTM C1107 – Standard Specification for Packaged Dry, Hydraulic-Cement Grout (Non- Shrink).
04. DEFINITIONS
   1. **Abandonment.** Pipeline abandonment consists of filling or plugging portions of existing pipelines with flowable fill or grout plugs, as indicated on the Drawings. Manhole abandonment consists of removing cylinders, rings and lids above the depth indicated on the Drawings, and filling the remainder with flowable fill.
2. **Flowable Fill.** Flowable fill shall be controlled low-strength material consisting of fluid mixture of cement, fly ash, aggregate, water and with admixtures as necessary to provide workable properties. Placement of flowable fill may be by grouting techniques in pipelines or other restricted areas, or as mass placement by chutes or tremie methods in unrestricted locations with open access. Long-term hardened strength shall be within specified range. Flowable fill will only be required at critical locations indicated on the Drawings.
3. **Backgrouting.** Secondary stage pressure grouting to ensure that voids have been filled within abandoned pipes. Backgrouting will only be required at critical locations indicated on the Drawings or if there is evidence of incomplete flowable fill placements.
05. Submittals
   1. Shop Drawings which, at a minimum, indicate the proposed type of abandoning method to be used; the arrangement, location, and depths and required volume, a complete description of equipment and instrumentation to be used, with installation, operation procedures.
2. Submit flowable fill mix design report.
3. Flowable fill type and production method. Describe if fill will be mixed to final proportions and consistency in batch plant or if constituents will be added in transit mixer at placement location.
4. Aggregate gradation of fill. Aggregate gradation of mix shall be used as pilot curve for quality control during production.
5. Fill mix constituents and proportions including materials by weight and volume, and air content. Give types and amounts of admixtures including air entrainment or air generating compounds.
6. Fill densities and viscosities, including wet density at point of placement.
7. initial time of set.
8. Bleeding and shrinkage.
9. Compressive strength.
10. Submit technical information for equipment and operational procedures including projected injection rate, grout pressure, method for controlling grout pressure, bulkhead and vent design and number of stages for grout application.
1. PART 2 - MATERIALS
1. 2.01 Flowable Fill
   1. Design Mix Criteria. Provide design of one or more mixes to meet design criteria and conditions for placement. Present information required by Part 1, Paragraph E.1 in mix design, to include the following:
2. Cement:
      1. ASTM C150 Type I or II. Volume and weight per cubic yard of fill. Provide minimum cement content of 50 pounds per cubic yard.
3. Fly ash:
      1. ASTM C618, Class C or F. Volume and weight per cubic yard of fill. Provide minimum fly ash content of 200 pounds per cubic yard.
4. Potable water:
      1. Volume and weight per cubic yard of fill. Amount of water determined by mix design testing. 
5. Aggregate gradation:
      1. 100 percent passing 3/8-inch sieve and not more than 10 percent passing No. 200 sieve. Mix design report shall define pilot gradation based on following sieve sizes:
      1. 3/8 inch, No. 4, 8, 16, 30, 50, 100, and 200. Do not deviate from pilot gradation by more than plus or minus 10 percentage points for any sieve for production material.
6. Aggregate source material:
      1. Screened or crushed aggregate, pit or bank run fine gravels or sand, or crushed concrete. If crushed concrete is used, add at least 30 percent natural aggregate to provide workability.
7. Admixtures:
      1. use admixtures meeting ASTM C494 and ASTM C1017 as needed to improve pumpability, to control time of set and to reduce bleeding.
8. Fluidifier:
      1. Use fluidifier meeting ASTM C937 as necessary to hold solid constituents in suspension. Add shrinkage compensator if necessary.
9. Performance additive:
      1. Use flowable fill performance additive, if needed, to control fill properties.
1. 2.02 Flowable Fill Requirements:
      1. Unconfined compressive strength:
         1. minimum 75 psi and maximum 150 psi at 56 days as determined based on an average of three tests for same placement. Present at least three acceptable strength tests for proposed mix design in mix design report.
2. Placement characteristics:
      1. self-leveling.
3. Shrinkage characteristics:
      1. non-shrink.
4. Water bleeding for fill to be placed by grouting method in pipes:
      1. not to exceed 2 percent according to ASTM C940.
5. Minimum wet density:
      1. 90 pounds per cubic foot.
6. Grout Plugs
7. Cement-based dry-pack grout conforming to ASTM C1107, Grade B, or C.
   1. Execution

* 
	1. **PERMANENT ABANDONMENT OF PIPELINES AND APPURTENANCES
   1. When indicated on the Approved Plans or when directed by the City Engineer, existing pipelines to be abandoned shall be disconnected from all source pipelines and shall remain in place in accordance with the Standard Drawings and the modifications and instructions listed below:
      1. All above-ground appurtenances connected to pipelines to be abandoned shall be removed and disposed of or salvaged in accordance with this Section.
2. All pipelines to be abandoned in place shall be flushed and dewatered to the City Engineers satisfaction prior to cutting and plugging the ends with concrete.
3. All piping and appurtenances buried at a depth of 24” or less and connected to pipelines to be abandoned shall be removed and disposed of or salvaged in accordance with this Section. Remaining pipe ends, gate wells and other appurtenances cut at a depth of 24” shall be removed entirely or filled with concrete. Excavated areas shall be replaced with compacted backfill and surfaces shall be repaired in accordance with these Standard Specifications. 
4. Pipe 4” and smaller to be abandoned shall be excavated at intervals of 200’, short sections of pipe shall be removed, and pipe ends shall be cut, plugged, and encased in concrete.
5. Pipe 6” through 12” to be abandoned in place in accordance with the Standard Drawings. 
6. When existing pipe 12” or less is excavated for abandonment, each excavation is considered as a single “cut-and-plug.”
7. Ends of all pipe segments to be abandoned shall be filled with concrete in accordance with the Standard Drawings.
8. All valves on pipelines to be abandoned shall be turned to the closed position. Valve covers and cans shall be removed and the valve extension shall be filled with 1 sack cement slurry.
	1. **REMOVAL OF PIPELINES AND APPURTENANCES
9. Existing pipe and appurtenances shall be completely removed when indicated on the Approved Plans or as directed by the City Engineer. All materials removed during construction operations shall be salvaged or disposed of in accordance with this Section.
10. When fittings, appurtenances, or pipe segments are removed from pipelines that are to remain in service, the removed portions shall be replaced with straight segments of pipe and appropriate couplings selected from the Approved Materials List, or approved equal.
11. Removal of asbestos-cement pipe (ACP) mains and appurtenances shall be in accordance with all applicable State and Federal requirements, and disposal shall be in accordance with the requirements of this Section.
12. Backfill, compaction, and surface repair of all excavations for removal of pipe and appurtenances shall be made in accordance with the Approved Plans, these Standard Specifications, and in accordance with the requirements of the agency of jurisdiction or as directed by the City Engineer.
	1. **aBANDONMENT OF water services
13. Abandoned Water Services: For water service to be considered abandoned, all surface fittings, meter, meter box and customer service valve shall be removed. The service line and corporation stop shall be removed and the service saddle plugged with a brass plug. If there is no corporation stop on the service, the adapter shall be removed and a brass plug installed in the service saddle. With special permission of the City representative, the horizontal portions of the service line may be abandoned in place by cutting and crimping the ends closed.
14. Existing water service lines connected to the water main to be abandoned shall be removed from the existing water main to the water meter.
15. Water services to be abandoned that are connected to pipelines that will remain in service shall be abandoned in-place and deactivated at the corp stop in accordance with the Standard Drawings. Water services connected to pipelines to be abandoned shall be abandoned in-place and cut ends shall be crimped.
	1. **Preparation
16. Notify inspector at least 24-hours in advance of grouting with flowable fill.
17. Select fill placement equipment and follow procedures with sufficient safety and care to avoid damage to existing underground utilities and structures. Operate equipment at pressure that will not distort or imperil portions of the work, new or existing.
18. Cut and cap portions of the piping system to remain, as shown on the Drawings. Drain water mains to be abandoned.
19. Perform demolition work prior to starting fill placement. Clean placement areas for pipes and manholes of debris that may hinder fill placement. Remove excessive amounts of sludge and other substances that may degrade performance of the fill. Do not leave sludge or other debris in place if filling more than 2 percent of placement volume. Dispose of waste material in accordance with applicable codes and regulations.
20. Remove free water prior to fill placement.
	1. **Equipment
21. Mix flowable fill in automated batch plant and deliver it to site in ready-mix trucks. Performance additives may be added at placement site if required by mix design.
22. Use concrete or grout pumps capable of continuous delivery at planned placement rate.
	1. **Installation of Flowable Fill
23. Abandon pipelines, as required in Part 3, Paragraph A, by completely filling with flowable fill.
24. Perform operation with experienced crews with equipment to monitor density of flowable fill and to control pressure.
25. Temporarily plug or cap pipe segments which are to remain in operation during filling to keep lines free of flowable fill.
26. Pump flowable fill through bulkheads or use other suitable construction methods to contain flowable fill in lines to be abandoned.
27. Place flowable fill under pressure flow conditions into properly vented open system until flowable fill emerges from vent pipes. Pump flowable fill with sufficient pressure to overcome friction. Fill sewers from the downstream end to vent at upstream end.
28. Backfill excavations per Section 02223, Trenching, Backfilling and Compacting.
29. Collect and dispose of excess flowable fill material and debris.
	1. **Installation of Grout Plugs
30. Abandon pipelines of diameter 8-inches and below, as required in Part 3, Paragraph A, by cutting and placing grout plugs.
31. Clean inside surface of pipe at least 12-inches from ends, achieving firm bond and seal grout plug to pipe surface. Similarly clean and prepare exterior surface if manufactured cap is to be used.
32. Place temporary plug or bulkhead approximately 12-inches inside pipe. Fill pipe end completely with dry-pack grout mixture.
33. Backfill excavations per Section 02223, Trenching, Backfilling and Compacting.
34. Collect and dispose of excess grout material and debris.
	1. **Quality Control
35. Provide batch plant tickets for each truck delivery of flowable fill. Note on tickets addition of admixtures at site.
36. Check flow characteristics and workability of fill as placement proceeds.
37. Obtain at least three test cylinders for each placement area for determination of 56-daycompressive strength and bleeding. Acceptance of placement will be based on average strength of three tests.
38. Record volume of flowable fill placement to demonstrate that voids have been filled. If voids exceed 10% of pipeline volume, injection grouting may be required at the direction of the Project Manager.
	1. **Protection of Persons and Property.
39. Provide safe working conditions for employees throughout demolition and removal operations. Observe safety requirements for work below grade.
40. Maintain safe access to adjacent property and buildings. Do not obstruct roadways, sidewalks or passageways adjacent to the work.
1. 3.11 SALVAGE
   1. When the Contractor is required to remove existing pipe and appurtenances, or portions thereof, from the ground, such material may, at the discretion of the Engineer, be considered salvage. All materials identified as salvage are considered property of the City.
   1. The Contractor shall remove and temporarily stockpile all materials identified as salvage in a safe location that will not disrupt traffic or shall deliver salvage to the City's Field Operations Yard as directed by the City Engineer.
   1. The Contractor shall legally dispose of all other materials in an appropriate manner. Disposal is the responsibility of the Contractor. Obtain concurrence from the agency having disposal jurisdiction with respect to disposal sites and transportation methods.
1. 3.12 DISPOSAL
   1. All materials removed during construction operations and not identified by the City Engineer as salvage shall be legally disposed of in accordance with all applicable Local, State, and Federal requirements.
   1. Disposal of asbestos-cement pipe requires special handling and attention, including but not limited to, encapsulation within airtight packaging, submittal of certification letters and/or waste profile statements, and the use of a Cal-OSHA registered asbestos abatement contractor to transport and dispose of such wastes. The City Engineer shall be provided with copies of all applicable documentation regarding the transportation and disposal of asbestos-cement pipe. Contractor shall comply with all applicable regulations and all requirements of the disposal site. Contractor is responsible for all costs associated with disposal of materials, specifically including any materials that may contain asbestos.
1. 3.13** **ABANDONMENT OR REMOVAL FROM SERVICE OF EXISTING FACILITIES
   1. Before excavating for new mains that are to replace existing pipes or services, the Contractor shall make provisions for the continuation and maintenance of service to customers as directed by the City Engineer.
   1. Abandonment or removal from service of existing mains, appurtenances or water services shown on the Approved Plans or as called for by the City Engineer shall be as directed by the City Engineer.
   1. Abandonment or removal from service of existing mains, appurtenances, or water services shown on the Approved Plans or as called for by the City Engineer shall be as indicated below and in accordance with the Standard Drawings:
      1. Abandonment in place:
         1. Existing pipe 4" and smaller shall have a short section of pipe removed and pipe ends encased in concrete.
2. Existing pipe 6" through 14" shall be cut, plugged, and encased with concrete at the ends of each section.
3. Existing pipe ends shall be filled with concrete.
4. All valves shall be removed with remaining pipe or fittings permanently sealed with blind flange or concrete plug.
5. Valve boxes shall be removed and cut 24" below grade and filled with 1 slurry sack concrete.
6. All existing valves to be replaced shall be removed from the operating, existing water main including the valve cans.
7. Existing, abandoned meter boxes and curb stops shall be removed. Service laterals shall be cut back a minimum of 24-inches below the finish grade and removed.
8. Water services including piping and valves connected to pipelines shall be removed and plugged at the service saddle unless otherwise directed by the City.
   1. Removal by excavation:
      1. Existing pipe and appurtenances shall be removed from the ground as indicated on the Approved Plans or as directed by the City Engineer. 
2. Removal of asbestos-cement pipe (ACP) mains and appurtenances shall be in accordance with all applicable State and Federal requirements. Legal disposal is the responsibility of the Contractor. Obtain approval from the agency having disposal jurisdiction with respect to disposal sites.
4. Backfill, compaction, and surface repair of all excavations for removal of pipe and appurtenances shall be made in accordance with the Approved Plans, Section 02223 of the Standard Specifications, and the Standard Drawings.
1. 3.14 RECONNECTIONS
   1. The Contractor may encounter unused service laterals or appurtenant piping connected to an existing pipeline being replaced. Laterals and appurtenance piping that will not be connected to the new pipeline shall be abandoned as described.
1. Existing service laterals or appurtenances to be connected to new pipelines shall be installed new from the new main to the new or existing water meter and or to the first vertical fitting for fire service as shown on the Approved Plans or as directed by the City Engineer in accordance with the Standard Drawings.
2. The Contractor shall furnish and replace 3/4-inch piping with 1-inch piping and the required transition fitting to connect to existing meters.
1. END OF SECTION

