---
title: Flushing of Water Utility Piping
section: '330110.53'
divNumb: 33
divName: Utilities
subgroup: Site and Infrastructure
tags: ['Site', 'Infrastructure', 'Utilities', 'Flushing', 'Water', 'Utility', 'Piping']
---

   1. SECTION 15074
1. BLOWOFF ASSEMBLIES
1. 
General
01. DESCRIPTION
   1. This section includes materials, testing, and installation of blowoff assemblies.
02. RELATED WORK SPECIFIED ELSEWHERE
   1. Standard Drawings
2. Standard Specifications 01000, 01045, 01200, 01310, 01330, 01505, 01510, 01570, 02140, 02222, 02223, 02511, 02528, 02578, 03000, 03480, 03482, 09902, 09910, and Division 15.
03. SERVICE APPLICATION
   1. Blow off assemblies shall be installed on potable and recycled water mains.
   1. Blow off assemblies shall be sized and located as shown on the Approved Plans. In general, blow off assemblies will be installed at the ends and at low points of pipelines as shown below:
      1. 2" blowoff assemblies will be required on pipelines for temporary use, when shown on the Approved Plans, or as otherwise directed by the City Engineer.
   1. 4" blowoff assemblies will be required on pipeline 16" and smaller.
   1. 6” blowoff assembly will be required on pipeline sizes 18" and larger.
05. WARNING/IDENTIFICATION TAPE
   1. Warning/Identification tape shall be installed for blowoff assemblies in accordance with Section 15000.
1. PART 2 MATERIALS
1. 2.01 GENERAL
   1. Blowoff assemblies and appurtenant components and materials shall be selected from the Approved Materials List.
1. 2.02 CONCRETE
   1. Concrete used for thrust or anchor blocks shall be in accordance with Section 03000.
1. 2.03 WARNING/IDENTIFICATION TAPE
   1. Warning/Identification tape materials shall be in accordance with Section 15000 and the Approved Materials List.
1. 2.04 FIELD PAINTING AND COATING
   1. Field painting and coating materials shall be in accordance with Section 09910 and the Approved Materials List.
1. 

## Execution

1. 3.01 INSTALLATION

* 
	1. Blow off assemblies shall be installed at locations shown on the Approved Plans or as directed by the City Engineer in accordance with the Standard Drawings.
	2. Blow off assemblies shall be connected to water mains no closer than 24” to a bell, coupling, joint or fitting.
	3. Locations of blow off assembly meter boxes or valve boxes shall be in accordance with the Standard Drawings.
1. 3.02 CONCRETE
   1. Concrete thrust and anchor blocks shall be installed in accordance with Section 03000 and the Standard Drawings. Refer to Section 03000 for the minimum concrete curing time required.
1. 3.03 WARNING/IDENTIFICATION TAPE
   1. Warning/Identification tape shall be installed in accordance with Section 15000 and the Standard Drawings.
1. 3.04 DISINFECTION OF BLOWOFF ASSEMBLIES
   1. Blowoff assemblies shall be disinfected in accordance with Section 15041 in conjunction with disinfecting the main to which it is connected. Blowoff assembly valves shall be operated and the assembly shall be flushed to completely disinfect all internal parts.
1. 3.05 HYDROSTATIC TESTING
   1. Blowoff assemblies shall be hydrostatically tested in accordance with Section 15044 in conjunction with hydrostatically testing the pipeline to which it is connected.
1. 3.06 FIELD PAINTING AND COATING
   1. Blowoff assembly appurtenances shall be field-painted in accordance with Section 09910.
1. END OF SECTION

