---
title: Immigration Compliance
section: '004546'
divNumb: 0
divName: Procurement and Contracting Requirements
subgroup: Procurement and Contracting Requirements
tags: ['Procurement', 'Contracting', 'Requirements', 'Immigration', 'Compliance']
---

1. Notification Of Immigration Compliance Requirements and Certification by Contractor
2. The Owner has entered into a public contract for services (the “Contract”) with the following named contractor (herein called “Contractor”):
   1. The Contractor acknowledges that Contractor has been notified of the immigration compliance requirements of C.R.S. § 8-17.5-101, *et.seq.* (House Bill 06-1343), hereby agrees with the District to add this Addendum to the Contract and incorporate this Addendum therein, and hereby further agrees and CERTIFIES that:
         1. The Contractor shall comply with the provisions of C.R.S. 8-17.5-101 et seq.
 1. The Contractor shall not knowingly employ or contract with an illegal alien to perform work under this Contract, and shall not enter into a contract with a subcontractor that fails to certify to Contractor that the subcontractor shall not knowingly employ or contract with an illegal alien to perform work under this Contract.
 2. The Contractor states that it (I) has verified, or attempted to verify through participation in the Basic Pilot Employment Verification Program administered by the Social Security Administration and/or the Department of Homeland Security, that it does not employ illegal aliens. If the Contractor has not been accepted into the said Basic Pilot Employment Verification Program prior to entering into this Contact, then the Contractor shall apply to participate in the said Basic Pilot Employment Verification Program every 3 months until the Contractor is accepted or this Contract has been completed, whichever is earlier. 
 3. The Contractor shall not use the said Basic Pilot Employment Verification Program procedures to undertake pre-employment screening of job applicants while this Contract is being performed.
 4. If the Contractor obtains actual knowledge that a subcontractor performing work under this Contract knowingly employs or contracts with an illegal alien, the Contractor shall be required to:
       1. (A) Notify the subcontractor and the District within three days that the Contractor has actual knowledge that the subcontractor is employing or contracting with an illegal alien; and

(B) Terminate the subcontract with the subcontractor if within three days of receiving the notice required pursuant to subparagraph (A) of this Section 5 the subcontractor does not stop employing or contracting with the illegal alien; except that the Contractor shall not terminate the contract with the subcontractor if during such three days the subcontractor provides information to establish that the subcontractor has not knowingly employed or contracted with an illegal alien.

 6. Contractor is required to comply with any reasonable request by the State Department of Labor and Employment (“Department” herein) made in the course of an investigation that the Department is undertaking pursuant to the authority established in C.R.S. § 8-17.5-102(5).
 7. If Contractor violates any of the provisions of Paragraphs 2 of through 6 of this Addendum above, the District may terminate the Contract for a breach of the Contract. If the Contract is so terminated, the Contractor shall be liable for actual and consequential damages to the District.
 8. The District is obligated to notify the office of the secretary of state if Contractor violates a provision of this Addendum and the District terminates this Contract for such breach. Based on this notification, the secretary of state shall maintain a list that includes the name of the Contractor, the name of District that terminated this Contract, and the date of the termination. Colorado law provides that the Contractor shall be removed from the list if two years have passed since the date this Contract was terminated, or if a court of competent jurisdiction determines that there has not been a violation of any of Paragraphs 2 through 6 of this Addendum above. The District shall notify the office of the secretary of state if a court has made such a determination. The list shall be available for public inspection at the office of the secretary of state and shall be published on the internet on the website maintained by the office of the secretary of state.
 9. The Department may investigate whether the Contractor is complying with the provisions of Paragraphs 2 through 6 of this Addendum. The Department may conduct on-site inspections where this Contract is being performed, request and review documentation that proves the citizenship of any person performing work on this Contract, or take any other reasonable steps that are necessary to determine whether Contractor is complying with the provisions of Paragraphs 2 through 6 of this Addendum. The Department shall receive complaints of suspected violations of a provision of Paragraphs 2 through 6 of this Addendum, and shall have discretion to determine which complaints, if any, are to be investigated. The results of any investigation shall not constitute final agency action. The Contractor is hereby notified that the Department is authorized to promulgate rules in accordance with article 4 of title 24, C.R.S., to implement the provisions of C.R.S. § 8-17.5-101, *et. seq*.
   1. Dated:
      1. By CONTRACTOR:
            1. 