---
title: Exhibit A
section: '005252'
divNumb: 0
divName: Procurement and Contracting Requirements
subgroup: Procurement and Contracting Requirements
tags: ['Procurement', 'Contracting', 'Requirements', 'Exhibit', 'A']
---

1.  SUGGESTED FORMAT

(for use with E-510, 2002 Edition)

1.  This is **EXHIBIT A**, consisting of 9 pages, referred to in and part of the **Agreement between Owner and Engineer for Professional Services** dated .
1.  Owner's Consultant's Services
1.  BASIC SERVICES
1.  Article 1 of the Agreement is amended and supplemented to include the following agreement of the parties. Engineer shall provide Basic and Additional Services as set forth below.

    1. Study and Report Phase
       1. Engineer shall:
       1. Consult with Owner to define and clarify Owner’s requirements for the Project and available data.
       1. Advise Owner of any need for Owner to provide data or services of the types described in Exhibit B which are not part of Engineer’s Basic Services.
       1. Identify, consult with, and analyze requirements of governmental authorities having jurisdiction to approve the portions of the Project designed or specified by Engineer, including but not limited to mitigating measures identified in the environmental assessment.
       1. Identify and evaluate [*insert specific number or list here*] all reasonable alternate solutions available to Owner and, after consultation with Owner, recommend to Owner those solutions which in Engineer’s judgment meet Owner’s requirements for the Project.
       1. In accordance with Agency guidance, prepare a preliminary engineering report (the “Report”) which will, as appropriate, contain schematic layouts, sketches, operation and maintenance costs, and conceptual design criteria with appropriate exhibits to indicate the agreed-to requirements, considerations involved, and those alternate solutions available to Owner which Engineer recommends. For each recommended solution Engineer will provide the following, which will be separately itemized: opinion of probable Construction Cost; proposed allowances for contingencies; the estimated total costs of design, professional, and related services to be provided by Engineer and its Consultants; and, on the basis of information furnished by Owner, a summary of allowances for other items and services included within the definition of Total Project Costs.
       1. Perform or provide the following additional Study and Report Phase tasks or deliverables: [*here list any such tasks or deliverables*]

1.  Environment Report in accordance with Agency requirements.
1.  Provide engineering information for applications and supporting documents for private or governmental grants, loans, or advances in connection with the Project.
1.  Prepare feasibility studies and preliminary ranges of rate schedules if required for the Project.

_[List others]_

    	1. Furnish  review copies of the Report and any other deliverables to Owner and Agency within  calendar days of authorization to begin services and review it with Owner.
    		2. Revise the Report and any other deliverables in response to Owner’s and Agency’s comments, as appropriate, and furnish copies of the revised Report and any other deliverables to the Owner and Agency within calendar days of receipt of all such comments.
    		1. Engineer’s services under the Study and Report Phase will be considered complete on the date when the revised Report and any other deliverables have been delivered to and accepted by Owner and Agency, as appropriate.
    	1. Preliminary Design Phase
    		1. After acceptance by Owner and Agency of the Report and any other deliverables, selection by Owner of a recommended solution and indication of any specific modifications or changes in the scope, extent, character, or design requirements of the Project desired by Owner, and upon written authorization from Owner, Engineer shall:
    		1. Prepare Preliminary Design Phase documents consisting of final design criteria, preliminary drawings, outline specifications, and written descriptions of the Project.
    		2. Provide necessary field surveys and topographic and utility mapping for design purposes. Utility mapping will be based upon information obtained from utility owners.
    		3. Provide to Owner three copies of maps showing the general location of required construction easements and permanent easements and the land to be acquired.
    		4. Advise Owner if additional reports, data, information, or services of the types described in Exhibit B are necessary and assist Owner in obtaining such reports, data, information, or services.
    		5. Based on the information contained in the Preliminary Design Phase documents, prepare a revised opinion of probable Construction Cost, and assist Owner in collating the various cost categories which comprise Total Project Costs.
    		6. Perform or provide the following additional Preliminary Design Phase tasks or deliverables: [*here list any such tasks or deliverables*]
    		7. Furnish review copies of the Preliminary Design Phase documents and any other deliverables to Owner (and Agency, if required) within calendar days of authorization to proceed with this phase, and review them with Owner.
    		8. Revise the Preliminary Design Phase documents and any other deliverables in response to comments from Owner (and Agency), as appropriate, and furnish to Owner (and Agency) copies of the revised Preliminary Design Phase documents, revised opinion of probable Construction Cost, and any other deliverables within calendar days after receipt of all such comments.
    		2. Engineer’s services under the Preliminary Design Phase will be considered complete on the date when the revised Preliminary Design Phase documents, revised opinion of probable Construction Cost, and any other deliverables have been delivered to Owner (and Agency, if required).
    	2. Final Design Phase
    		1. After acceptance by Owner (and by Agency, if required) of the Preliminary Design Phase documents, revised opinion of probable Construction Cost as determined in the Preliminary Design Phase, and any other deliverables subject to any Owner-directed modifications or changes in the scope, extent, character, or design requirements of or for the Project, and upon written authorization from Owner, Engineer shall:
    		1. Prepare final Drawings and Specifications indicating the scope, extent, and character of the Work to be performed and furnished by Contractor. If appropriate, Specifications shall conform to the 16-division format of the Construction Specifications Institute.
    		2. Provide technical criteria, written descriptions, and design data for Owner’s use in filing applications for permits from or approvals of governmental authorities having jurisdiction to review or approve the final design of the Project; assist Owner in consultations with such authorities; and revise the Drawings and Specifications in response to directives from such authorities.
    		3. Advise Owner of any adjustments to the opinion of probable Construction Cost and any adjustments to Total Project Costs known to Engineer.
    		4. Perform or provide the following additional Final Design Phase tasks or deliverables: [*here list any such tasks or deliverables*]
    		5. Prepare and furnish Bidding Documents for review by the Owner, its legal counsel, its other advisors, regulatory agencies, and Agency, within calendar days of authorization to proceed with this phase, and assist Owner in the preparation of other related documents. Bidding documents will comply with Agency’s requirements in effect as of the date of Owner authorizing work in this phase.
    		6. Revise the Bidding Documents in accordance with comments and instructions from the Owner and Agency, as appropriate, and submit final copies of the Bidding Documents, a revised opinion of probable Construction Cost, and any other deliverables to Owner and Agency within calendar days after receipt of all such comments and instructions.
    		2. Engineer’s services under the Final Design Phase will be considered complete on the date when the submittals required by paragraph A.1.03.A.6 have been delivered to and accepted by Owner and Agency.
    		3. In the event that the Work designed or specified by Engineer is to be performed or furnished under more than one prime contract, or if Engineer’s services are to be separately sequenced with the work of one or more prime Contractors (such as in the case of fast-tracking), Owner and Engineer shall, prior to commencement of the Final Design Phase, develop a schedule for performance of Engineer’s services during the Final Design, Bidding or Negotiating, Construction, and Post-Construction Phases in order to sequence and coordinate properly such services as are applicable to the work under such separate prime contracts. This schedule is to be prepared and included in or become an amendment to Exhibit A whether or not the work under such contracts is to proceed concurrently.
    		4. The number of prime contracts for Work designed or specified by Engineer upon which the Engineer’s compensation has been established under this Agreement is . If more prime contracts are awarded, Engineer shall be entitled to an equitable increase in its compensation under this Agreement.
    	3. Bidding or Negotiating Phase
    		1. After acceptance by Owner and Agency of the Bidding Documents and the most recent opinion of probable Construction Cost as determined in the Final Design Phase, and upon written authorization by Owner to proceed, Engineer shall:
    		1. Assist Owner in advertising for and obtaining bids or proposals for the Work and, where applicable, maintain a record of prospective bidders to whom Bidding Documents have been issued, attend pre-Bid conferences, if any, and receive and process contractor deposits or charges for the Bidding Documents.
    		2. Issue Addenda as appropriate to clarify, correct, or change the Bidding Documents.
    		3. Provide information or assistance needed by Owner in the course of any negotiations with prospective contractors.
    		4. Consult with Owner as to the acceptability of subcontractors, suppliers, and other individuals and entities proposed by prospective contractors for those portions of the Work as to which such acceptability is required by the Bidding Documents.
    		5. Determine the acceptability of substitute materials and equipment proposed when substitution is necessary because the specified item is incompatible with the Project or fails to comply with applicable codes.
    		6. Perform or provide the following additional Bidding or Negotiating Phase tasks or deliverables: [*here list any such tasks or deliverables*]
    		7. Attend the Bid opening, prepare Bid tabulation sheets, and assist Owner in evaluating Bids or proposals and in assembling and awarding contracts for the Work.
    		2. The Bidding or Negotiating Phase will be considered complete upon commencement of the Construction Phase or upon cessation of negotiations with prospective contractors (except as may be required if Exhibit F is a part of this Agreement).
    	4. Construction Phase
    		1. Upon successful completion of the Bidding and Negotiating Phase, and upon written authorization from Owner, Engineer shall:
    		1. *General Administration of Construction Contract.* Consult with Owner and act as Owner’s representative as provided in the General Conditions. The extent and limitations of the duties, responsibilities, and authority of Engineer as assigned in the General Conditions shall not be modified, except as Engineer may otherwise agree in writing. All of Owner’s instructions to Contractor will be issued through Engineer, which shall have authority to act on behalf of Owner in dealings with Contractor to the extent provided in this Agreement and the General Conditions except as otherwise provided in writing.
    		2. *Resident Project Representative (RPR).* Unless otherwise notified in writing by Owner, Engineer shall provide the services of Resident Project Representative (RPR) at the Site to assist Engineer and to provide more continuous observations of such work on a full-time basis unless part-time services are expressly approved by Agency and this Agreement is amended accordingly. Engineer will, prior to the pre-construction conference, submit a resume of the RPR’s qualifications for approval by Owner and Agency. The duties, responsibilities, and limitations of authority of the RPR are as set forth in Exhibit D. The furnishing of such Resident Project Representative service will not limit, extend, or modify Engineer’s responsibilities or authority except as expressly set forth in Exhibit D.
    		3. *Selecting Independent Testing Laboratory.* Assist Owner in the selection of an independent testing laboratory to perform the services identified in Exhibit B, paragraph B.2.01.O.
    		4. *Pre-Construction Conference.* Participate in a Pre-Construction Conference prior to commencement of Work at the Site. If RPR services are provided by Engineer, ensure RPR attends Pre-Construction Conference.
    		5. *Schedules*. Receive, review, and determine the acceptability of any and all schedules that Contractor is required to submit to Engineer, including the Progress Schedule, Schedule of Submittals, and Schedule of Values.
    		6. *Baselines and Benchmarks.* As appropriate, establish baselines and benchmarks for locating the Work which in Engineer’s judgment are necessary to enable Contractor to proceed.
    		7. *Visits to Site and Observation of Construction.* In connection with observations of Contractor’s Work while it is in progress:
      1. Make visits to the Site at intervals appropriate to the various stages of construction, as Engineer deems necessary, but at least monthly, to observe as an experienced and qualified design professional the progress and quality of Contractor’s executed Work. Such visits and observations by Engineer, and the Resident Project Representative, if any, are not intended to be exhaustive or to extend to every aspect of Contractor’s Work in progress or to involve detailed inspections of Contractor’s Work in progress beyond the responsibilities specifically assigned to Engineer in this Agreement and the Contract Documents, but rather are to be limited to spot checking, selective sampling, and similar methods of general observation of the Work based on Engineer’s exercise of professional judgment as assisted by the Resident Project Representative, if any. Based on information obtained during such visits and observations, Engineer will determine in general if the Work is proceeding in accordance with the Contract Documents, and Engineer shall keep Owner informed of the progress of the Work.

1.  The purpose of Engineer’s visits to, and representation by the Resident Project Representative, if any, at the Site, will be to enable Engineer to better carry out the duties and responsibilities assigned to and undertaken by Engineer during the Construction Phase, and, in addition, by the exercise of Engineer’s efforts as an experienced and qualified design professional, to provide for Owner a greater degree of confidence that the completed Work will conform in general to the Contract Documents and that Contractor has implemented and maintained the integrity of the design concept of the completed Project as a functioning whole as indicated in the Contract Documents. Engineer shall not, during such visits or as a result of such observations of Contractor’s Work in progress, supervise, direct, or have control over Contractor’s Work, nor shall Engineer have authority over or responsibility for the means, methods, techniques, sequences, or procedures of construction selected or used by Contractor, for security or safety on the Site, for safety precautions and programs incident to Contractor’s Work, nor for any failure of Contractor to comply with Laws and Regulations applicable to Contractor’s furnishing and performing the Work. Accordingly, Engineer neither guarantees the performance of any Contractor nor assumes responsibility for any Contractor’s failure to furnish and perform the Work in accordance with the Contract Documents.

    1. _Defective Work._ Recommend to Owner that Contractor’s Work be rejected while it is in progress if, on the basis of Engineer’s observations, Engineer believes that such Work will not produce a completed Project that conforms generally to the Contract Documents or that it will threaten the integrity of the design concept of the completed Project as a functioning whole as indicated in the Contract Documents. 2. _Clarifications and Interpretations; Field Orders._ Issue necessary clarifications and interpretations of the Contract Documents as appropriate to the orderly completion of Contractor’s work. Such clarifications and interpretations will be consistent with the intent of and reasonably inferable from the Contract Documents. Engineer may issue Field Orders authorizing minor variations in the Work from the requirements of the Contract Documents. 3. _Change Orders and Work Change Directives._ Recommend Change Orders and Work Change Directives to Owner, as appropriate, and prepare Change Orders and Work Change Directives as required. 4. _Shop Drawings and Samples_. Review and approve or take other appropriate action in respect to Shop Drawings and Samples and other data which Contractor is required to submit, but only for conformance with the information given in the Contract Documents and compatibility with the design concept of the completed Project as a functioning whole as indicated by the Contract Documents. Such reviews and approvals or other action will not extend to means, methods, techniques, sequences, or procedures of construction or to safety precautions and programs incident thereto. Engineer shall meet any Contractor’s submittal schedule that Engineer has accepted. 5. _Substitutes and “or-equal.”_ Evaluate and determine the acceptability of substitute or “or-equal” materials and equipment proposed by Contractor, but subject to the provisions of paragraph A.2.01.A.23 of this Exhibit A. 6. _Inspections and Tests._ Require such special inspections or tests of Contractor’s work as deemed reasonably necessary, and receive and review all certificates of inspections, tests, and approvals required by Laws and Regulations or the Contract Documents. Engineer’s review of such certificates will be for the purpose of determining that the results certified indicate compliance with the Contract Documents and will not constitute an independent evaluation that the content or procedures of such inspections, tests, or approvals comply with the requirements of the Contract Documents. Engineer shall be entitled to rely on the results of such tests. 7. _Disagreements between Owner and Contractor_. Render formal written decisions on all duly submitted issues relating to the acceptability of Contractor’s work or the interpretation of the requirements of the Contract Documents pertaining to the execution, performance, or progress of Contractor’s Work; review each duly submitted Claim by Owner or Contractor, and in writing either deny such Claim in whole or in part, approve such Claim, or decline to resolve such Claim if Engineer in its discretion concludes that to do so would be inappropriate. In rendering such decisions, Engineer shall be fair and not show partiality to Owner or Contractor and shall not be liable in connection with any decision rendered in good faith in such capacity. 8. _Applications for Payment._ Based on Engineer’s observations as an experienced and qualified design professional and on review of Applications for Payment and accompanying supporting documentation:
    1. Determine the amounts that Engineer recommends Contractor be paid. Such recommendations of payment will be in writing and will constitute Engineer’s representation to Owner, based on such observations and review, that, to the best of Engineer’s knowledge, information and belief, Contractor’s Work has progressed to the point indicated, the quality of such Work is generally in accordance with the Contract Documents (subject to an evaluation of the Work as a functioning whole prior to or upon Substantial Completion, to the results of any subsequent tests called for in the Contract Documents, and to any other qualifications stated in the recommendation), and the conditions precedent to Contractor’s being entitled to such payment appear to have been fulfilled in so far as it is Engineer’s responsibility to observe Contractor’s Work. In the case of unit price work, Engineer’s recommendations of payment will include final determinations of quantities and classifications of Contractor’s Work (subject to any subsequent adjustments allowed by the Contract Documents).

1.  By recommending any payment, Engineer shall not thereby be deemed to have represented that observations made by Engineer to check the quality or quantity of Contractor’s Work as it is performed and furnished have been exhaustive, extended to every aspect of Contractor’s Work in progress, or involved detailed inspections of the Work beyond the responsibilities specifically assigned to Engineer in this Agreement and the Contract Documents. Neither Engineer’s review of Contractor’s Work for the purposes of recommending payments nor Engineer’s recommendation of any payment including final payment will impose on Engineer responsibility to supervise, direct, or control Contractor’s Work in progress or for the means, methods, techniques, sequences, or procedures of construction or safety precautions or programs incident thereto, or Contractor’s compliance with Laws and Regulations applicable to Contractor’s furnishing and performing the Work. It will also not impose responsibility on Engineer to make any examination to ascertain how or for what purposes Contractor has used the moneys paid on account of the Contract Price, or to determine that title to any portion of the Work in progress, materials, or equipment has passed to Owner free and clear of any liens, claims, security interests, or encumbrances, or that there may not be other matters at issue between Owner and Contractor that might affect the amount that should be paid.

    1. _Contractor’s Completion Documents._ Receive, review, and transmit to Owner maintenance and operating instructions, schedules, guarantees, bonds, certificates or other evidence of insurance required by the Contract Documents, certificates of inspection, tests and approvals, Shop Drawings, Samples and other data approved as provided under paragraph A.1.05.A.11, and the annotated record documents which are to be assembled by Contractor in accordance with the Contract Documents to obtain final payment. The extent of such review by Engineer will be limited as provided in paragraph A.1.05.A.11. 2. _Substantial Completion._ Promptly after notice from Contractor that Contractor considers the entire Work ready for its intended use, in company with Owner, the Agency’s representative, and Contractor, conduct a pre-final inspection to determine if the Work is substantially complete. If after considering any objections of Owner, Engineer considers the Work substantially complete, Engineer shall deliver a certificate of Substantial Completion to Owner, Agency, and Contractor. 3. _Record Drawings_. Prepare and furnish to Owner a set of reproducible Project Record Drawings showing appropriate record information based on Record Drawing information from Contractor and Project documentation received from RPR. 4. _Additional Tasks_. Perform or provide the following additional Construction Phase tasks or deliverables: [*here list any such tasks or deliverables*]. 5. _Final Notice of Acceptability of the Work_. In company with Owner’s and Agency’s representative, conduct a final inspection to determine if the completed Work of Contractor is acceptable so that Engineer may recommend, in writing, final payment to Contractor. Accompanying the recommendation for final payment, Engineer shall also provide a notice in the form attached hereto as Exhibit E (the “Notice of Acceptability of Work”) that the Work is acceptable (subject to the provisions of paragraph A.1.05.A.15.b) to the best of Engineer’s knowledge, information, and belief and based on the extent of the services provided by Engineer under this Agreement.
       1. _Duration of Construction Phase_. The Construction Phase will commence with the execution of the first construction Contract for the Project or any part thereof and will terminate upon written recommendation by Engineer for final payment to Contractors. If the Project involves more than one prime contract as indicated in paragraph A.1.03.C, Construction Phase services may be rendered at different times in respect to the separate contracts. Subject to the provisions of Article 3, Engineer shall be entitled to an equitable increase in compensation if Construction-Phase services are required after the original date for final completion of the Work as set forth in the construction Contract.
       2. _Limitation of Responsibilities_. Engineer shall not be responsible for the acts or omissions of any Contractor, or of any subcontractors, suppliers, or other individuals or entities performing or furnishing any of the Work. Engineer shall not be responsible for the failure of any Contractor to perform or furnish the Work in accordance with the Contract Documents.
    1. Post-Construction Phase
       1. Upon written authorization from Owner, Engineer, during the Post-Construction Phase, shall:
       1. Provide assistance in connection with the adjusting of Project equipment and systems.
       1. Assist Owner in training Owner’s staff to operate and maintain Project equipment and systems.
       1. Assist Owner in developing procedures for control of the operation and maintenance of, and record keeping for Project equipment and systems.
       1. Together with Owner, visit the Project to observe any apparent defects in the Work, assist Owner in consultations and discussions with Contractor concerning correction of any such defects, and make recommendations as to replacement or correction of Defective Work, if present.
       1. Perform or provide the following additional Post-Construction Phase tasks or deliverables:
       1. [*here list any such tasks or deliverables*].
       1. In company with Owner or Owner’s representative, provide an inspection of the Project within one month before the end of the Correction Period for Contractor’s Work to ascertain whether any portion of the Work is subject to correction.
       1. The Engineer shall provide a total of hours of assistance and necessary reimbursable expenses in providing services during the Post-Construction Phase.
       1. The Post-Construction Phase services may commence during the Construction Phase and, if not otherwise modified in this Exhibit A, will terminate at the end of the Construction Contract’s Correction Period.

1.  ADDITIONAL SERVICES

    1. Additional Services Requiring Owner’s Advance Written Authorization and Agency’s Concurrence
       1. If authorized in writing by Owner, with Agency concurrence, Engineer shall furnish or obtain from others Additional Services of the types listed below.
       1. Preparation or review of environmental assessments and impact statements; review and evaluation of the effects on the design requirements for the Project of any such statements and documents prepared by others; and assistance in obtaining approvals of authorities having jurisdiction over the anticipated environmental impact of the Project (which are not part of Basic Services).
       1. Services to make measured drawings of or to investigate existing conditions or facilities, or to verify the accuracy of drawings or other information furnished by Owner or others.
       1. Services resulting from significant changes in the scope, extent, or character of the portions of the Project designed or specified by Engineer or its design requirements including, but not limited to, changes in size, complexity, Owner’s schedule, character of construction, or method of financing; and revising previously accepted studies, reports, Drawings, Specifications, or Contract Documents when such revisions are required by changes in Laws and Regulations enacted subsequent to the Effective Date of this Agreement or are due to any other causes beyond Engineer’s control. Redesign to reduce Project costs to within the funds available as stated in Exhibit F shall not be considered Additional Services.
       1. Services resulting from Owner’s request to evaluate additional Study and Report Phase alternative solutions beyond those identified in paragraph A.1.01.A.4.
       1. Services required as a result of Owner’s providing incomplete or incorrect Project information to Engineer.
       1. Providing renderings or models for Owner’s use.
       1. Undertaking investigations and studies including, but not limited to, detailed consideration of operations, maintenance, and overhead expenses; the preparation of feasibility studies, cash flow and economic evaluations, rate schedules, and appraisals; assistance in obtaining financing for the Project; evaluating processes available for licensing, and assisting Owner in obtaining process licensing; detailed quantity surveys of materials, equipment, and labor; and audits or inventories required in connection with construction performed by Owner.
       1. Furnishing services of Engineer’s Consultants for other than Basic Services.
       1. Services attributable to more prime construction contracts than specified in paragraph A.1.03.C.
       1. Services (which are not part of Basic Services) during out-of-town travel required of Engineer other than for visits to the Site or Owner’s office.
       1. Preparing for, coordinating with, participating in and responding to structured independent review processes, including, but not limited to, construction management, cost estimating, project peer review, value engineering, and constructibility review requested by Owner; and performing or furnishing services required to revise studies, reports, Drawings, Specifications, or other Bidding Documents as a result of such review processes.
       1. Preparing additional Bidding Documents or Contract Documents for alternate bids or prices requested by Owner for the Work or a portion thereof.
       1. Determining the acceptability of substitute materials and equipment proposed during the Bidding or Negotiating Phase when substitution prior to the award of contracts is allowed by the Bidding Documents.
       1. Assistance in connection with Bid protests, rebidding, or renegotiating contracts for construction, materials, equipment, or services, except when such assistance is required by Exhibit F. Rebidding or renegotiating contracts to reduce the contract costs to funds available as stated in Exhibit F shall not be considered Additional Services.
       1. Providing construction surveys and staking to enable Contractor to perform its work other than as required under paragraph A.1.05.A.6, and any type of property surveys or related engineering services needed for the transfer of interests in real property; and providing other special field surveys.
       1. Providing Construction Phase services beyond the Contract Times set forth in Exhibit C.
       1. Providing assistance in responding to the presence of any Constituent of Concern at the Site, in compliance with current Laws and Regulations.
       1. Preparation of operation and maintenance manuals.
       1. Preparing to serve or serving as a consultant or witness for Owner in any litigation, arbitration, or other dispute resolution process related to the Project.
       1. Providing more extensive services required to enable Engineer to issue notices or certifications requested by Owner.
       1. Other services performed or furnished by Engineer not otherwise provided for in this Agreement.
       1. Services in connection with Work Change Directives and Change Orders to reflect changes requested by Owner so as to make compensation commensurate with the extent of the Additional Services rendered.
       1. Services in making revisions to Drawings and Specifications occasioned by the acceptance of substitute materials or equipment other than “or-equal” items; and services after the award of the Construction Contract in evaluating and determining the acceptability of a substitution which is found to be inappropriate for the Project or an excessive number of substitutions.
       1. Additional or extended services during construction made necessary by (1) emergencies or acts of God endangering the Work, (2) the presence at the Site of any Constituent of Concern, (3) Work damaged by fire or other cause during construction, (4) a significant amount of defective, neglected, or delayed work by Contractor, (5) acceleration of the progress schedule involving services beyond normal working hours, or (6) default by Contractor.
       1. Services (other than Basic Services during the Post-Construction Phase) in connection with any partial utilization of any part of the Work by Owner prior to Substantial Completion.
       1. Evaluating an unreasonable claim or an excessive number of claims submitted by Contractor or others in connection with the Work.
