---
title: Performance Bond Form
section: '006113.132'
divNumb: 0
divName: Procurement and Contracting Requirements
subgroup: Procurement and Contracting Requirements
tags: ['Procurement', 'Contracting', 'Requirements', 'Performance', 'Bond', 'Form']
---

1. PERFORMANCE BOND
   1. Any singular reference to Contractor, Surety, Owner, or other party shall be considered plural where applicable.
1. CONTRACTOR** (Name and Address)
1. SURETY** (Name and Address of Principal Place of Business)
1. OWNER** (Name and Address)
1. Town of Red Cliff** 

 **400 Pine Street, P.O. Box 40** 
1. Red Cliff, CO 81649
   1. CONTRACT
   1. Date:
    1. 
   1. Amount:
      1. Description (Name and Location):
            1. BOND
   1. Bond Number:
      1. Date (Not earlier than Contract):
            1. Amount:
         1. Modifications to this Bond Form:
               1. Surety and Contractor, intending to be legally bound hereby, subject to the terms printed on the reverse side hereof, do each cause this Performance Bond to be duly executed on its behalf by its authorized officer, agent, or representative.
   1. CONTRACTOR AS PRINCIPAL
   1. SURETY
   1. Company:
      1. Signature:
            1. (Seal)

(Seal)
   1. Name and Title:
      1. Surety’s Name and Corporate Seal
   1. By:
      1. Signature and Title

(Attach Power of Attorney)

(Space is provided below for signatures of additional parties, if required.)
   1. Attest:
      1. Signature and Title
   1. CONTRACTOR AS PRINCIPAL
   1. SURETY
   1. Company:
      1. Signature:
         1. 

(Seal)

(Seal)
   1. Name and Title:
      1. Surety’s Name and Corporate Seal
   1. By:
      1. Signature and Title

(Attach Power of Attorney)
   1. Attest:
      1. Signature and Title
1. EJCDC No. C-610 (2002 Edition)
   1. Originally prepared through the joint efforts of the Surety Association of America, Engineers Joint Contract Documents Committee, the Associated General Contractors of America, and the American Institute of Architects.
1. Contractor and Surety, jointly and severally, bind themselves, their heirs, executors, administrators, successors, and assigns to Owner for the performance of the Contract, which is incorporated herein by reference.
2. If Contractor performs the Contract, Surety and Contractor have no obligation under this Bond, except to participate in conferences as provided in Paragraph 3.1.
3. If there is no Owner Default, Surety's obligation under this Bond shall arise after:
1.. Owner has notified Contractor and Surety, at the addresses described in Paragraph 10 below, that Owner is considering declaring a Contractor Default and has requested and attempted to arrange a conference with Contractor and Surety to be held not later than 15 days after receipt of such notice to discuss methods of performing the Contract. If Owner, Contractor and Surety agree, Contractor shall be allowed a reasonable time to perform the Contract, but such an agreement shall not waive Owner's right, if any, subsequently to declare a Contractor Default; and
2.. Owner has declared a Contractor Default and formally terminated Contractor's right to complete the Contract. Such Contractor Default shall not be declared earlier than 20 days after Contractor and Surety have received notice as provided in Paragraph 3.1; and
3.. Owner has agreed to pay the Balance of the Contract Price to:
      1. Surety in accordance with the terms of the Contract;
2. Another contractor selected pursuant to Paragraph 4.3 to perform the Contract.
4. When Owner has satisfied the conditions of Paragraph 3, Surety shall promptly and at Surety's expense take one of the following actions:
1.. Arrange for Contractor, with consent of Owner, to perform and complete the Contract; or
2.. Undertake to perform and complete the Contract itself, through its agents or through independent contractors; or
3.. Obtain bids or negotiated proposals from qualified contractors acceptable to Owner for a contract for performance and completion of the Contract, arrange for a contract to be prepared for execution by Owner and Contractor selected with Owner's concurrence, to be secured with performance and payment bonds executed by a qualified surety equivalent to the bonds issued on the Contract, and pay to Owner the amount of damages as described in Paragraph 6 in excess of the Balance of the Contract Price incurred by Owner resulting from Contractor Default; or
4.. Waive its right to perform and complete, arrange for completion, or obtain a new contractor and with reasonable promptness under the circumstances: 
1. After investigation, determine the amount for which it may be liable to Owner and, as soon as practicable after the amount is determined, tender payment therefor to Owner; or
2. Deny liability in whole or in part and notify Owner citing reasons therefor.
5. If Surety does not proceed as provided in Paragraph 4 with reasonable promptness, Surety shall be deemed to be in default on this Bond 15 days after receipt of an additional written notice from Owner to Surety demanding that Surety perform its obligations under this Bond, and Owner shall be entitled to enforce any remedy available to Owner. If Surety proceeds as provided in Paragraph 4.4, and Owner refuses the payment tendered or Surety has denied liability, in whole or in 
   1. part, without further notice Owner shall be entitled to enforce any remedy available to Owner.
6. After Owner has terminated Contractor's right to complete the Contract, and if Surety elects to act under Paragraph 4.1, 4.2, or 4.3 above, then the responsibilities of Surety to Owner shall not be greater than those of Contractor under the Contract, and the responsibilities of Owner to Surety shall not be greater than those of Owner under the Contract. To a limit of the amount of this Bond, but subject to commitment by Owner of the Balance of the Contract Price to mitigation of costs and damages on the Contract, Surety is obligated without duplication for:
1.. The responsibilities of Contractor for correction of defective Work and completion of the Contract;
2.. Additional legal, design professional, and delay costs resulting from Contractor's Default, and resulting from the actions or failure to act of Surety under Paragraph 4; and
3.. Liquidated damages, or if no liquidated damages are specified in the Contract, actual damages caused by delayed performance or non-performance of Contractor.
7. Surety shall not be liable to Owner or others for obligations of Contractor that are unrelated to the Contract, and the Balance of the Contract Price shall not be reduced or set off on account of any such unrelated obligations. No right of action shall accrue on this Bond to any person or entity other than Owner or its heirs, executors, administrators, or successors.
8. Surety hereby waives notice of any change, including changes of time, to Contract or to related subcontracts, purchase orders, and other obligations.
9. Any proceeding, legal or equitable, under this Bond may be instituted in any court of competent jurisdiction in the location in which the Work or part of the Work is located and shall be instituted within two years after Contractor Default or within two years after Contractor ceased working or within two years after Surety refuses or fails to perform its obligations under this Bond, whichever occurs first. If the provisions of this paragraph are void or prohibited by law, the minimum period of limitation available to sureties as a defense in the jurisdiction of the suit shall be applicable.
10. Notice to Surety, Owner, or Contractor shall be mailed or delivered to the address shown on the signature page.
11. When this Bond has been furnished to comply with a statutory requirement in the location where the Contract was to be performed, any provision in this Bond conflicting with said statutory requirement shall be deemed deleted herefrom and provisions conforming to such statutory requirement shall be deemed incorporated herein. The intent is that this Bond shall be construed as a statutory bond and not as a common law bond.
12. Definitions.
1. Balance of the Contract Price:
      1. The total amount payable by Owner to Contractor under the Contract after all proper adjustments have been made, including allowance to Contractor of any amounts received or to be received by Owner in settlement of insurance or other Claims for damages to which Contractor is entitled, reduced by all valid and proper payments made to or on behalf of Contractor under the Contract. 
2.. Contract: The agreement between Owner and Contractor identified on the signature page, including all Contract Documents and changes thereto. 
3.. Contractor Default: Failure of Contractor, which has neither been remedied nor waived, to perform or otherwise to comply with the terms of the Contract.
4.. Owner Default: Failure of Owner, which has neither been remedied nor waived, to pay Contractor as required by the Contract or to perform and complete or comply with the other terms thereof.

