---
title: Payment Bond Form
section: '006113.16'
divNumb: 0
divName: Procurement and Contracting Requirements
subgroup: Procurement and Contracting Requirements
tags: ['Procurement', 'Contracting', 'Requirements', 'Payment', 'Bond', 'Form']
---

1. Engineers Joint Contract Documents Committee
1. Design and Construction Related Documents** 
1. 2010 Payment Bond (EJCDC C-615)** 
1. Instructions and License Agreement
1. Instructions
1. Before you use any EJCDC document:
      1. Read the License Agreement. You agree to it and are bound by its terms when you use the EJCDC document.
2. Make sure that you have the correct version for your word processing software.
1. How to Use:
      1. While EJCDC has expended considerable effort to make the software translations exact, it can be that a few document controls (e.g., bold, underline) did not carry over. 
2. Similarly, your software may change the font specification if the font is not available in your system. It will choose a font that is close in appearance. In this event, the pagination may not match the control set.
3. If you modify the document, you must follow the instructions in the License Agreement about notification.
1. License Agreement
1. You should carefully read the following terms and conditions before using this document. Commencement of use of this document indicates your acceptance of these terms and conditions. If you do not agree to them, you should promptly return the materials to the vendor, and your money will be refunded.
   1. The Engineers Joint Contract Documents Committee ("EJCDC") provides **EJCDC Design and Construction Related Documents** and licenses their use worldwide. You assume sole responsibility for the selection of specific documents or portions thereof to achieve your intended results, and for the installation, use, and results obtained from **EJCDC Design and Construction Related Documents**.
   1. The content of the Payment Bond (EJCDC C-615, 2010) was prepared in 2009-10 by the American Institute of Architects (AIA) with the cooperation of EJCDC, the Surety and Fidelity Association of America, the National Association of Surety Bond Producers, and other industry organizations, based on standard bond forms originally prepared through the joint efforts of the Surety Association of America, EJCDC, the Associated General Contractors of America, and AIA. The Payment Bond (EJCDC C-615) is published by EJCDC under agreement with AIA. All rights are reserved.
   1. You acknowledge that you understand that the text of the **EJCDC Payment Bond** (EJCDC C-615, 2010) has important legal consequences and that consultation with an attorney is recommended with respect to use or modification of the text. 
1. License:
      1. You have a limited non-exclusive license to:
            1. Use a duly purchased Payment Bond (EJCDC C-615, 2010) on any number of machines owned, leased or rented by your company or organization.
2. Use such Payment Bond for bona fide contractual and bonding purposes. 
3. Copy such Payment Bond into any electronic or printed form for backup or modification purposes. 
1. You agree that you will not** represent that any document that you generate from the Payment Bond (EJCDC C-615, 2010) isan EJCDC document unless (i) the document text is used without alteration or (ii) all additions and changes to, and deletions from, the text are clearly shown.
1. You may not use, copy, modify, or transfer the Payment Bond (EJCDC C-615, 2010) or any copy, modification or merged portion thereof, in whole or in part, except as expressly provided for in this license. Reproduction of the Payment Bond (EJCDC C-615, 2010) or any other EJCDC Design and Construction Related Document, in printed or electronic format for resale or educational purposes is expressly prohibited.
1. If you transfer possession of any copy, modification or merged portion of the Payment Bond (EJCDC C-615, 2010), or any other EJCDC Design and Construction Related Document, to another party, your license is automatically terminated.
1. Term:
      1. The license is effective until terminated. You may terminate it at any time by destroying the Payment Bond (EJCDC C-615, 2010) together with all copies, modifications and merged portions in any form. The license will also terminate upon conditions set forth elsewhere in this License Agreement or if you fail to comply with any term or condition of this License Agreement. You agree upon such termination to destroy the Payment Bond (EJCDC C-615, 2010) along with all copies, modifications and merged portions in any form.
1. Limited Warranty:
      1. EJCDC warrants that if the Payment Bond (EJCDC C-615, 2010) or any other **EJCDC Design and Construction Related Documents** has been provided in compact disc or other physical media format, the media is furnished free from defects in materials and workmanship under normal use for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of delivery to you as evidenced by a copy of your receipt.
1. There is no other warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied, including, but not limited to the implied warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose. Some states do not allow the exclusion of implied warranties, so the above exclusion may not apply to you. This warranty gives you specific legal rights and you may also have other rights which vary from state to state.
   1. EJCDC does not warrant that the functions contained in Payment Bond (EJCDC C-615, 2010) or any other **EJCDC Design and Construction Related Documents** will meet your requirements or that the operation of Payment Bond (EJCDC C-615, 2010) or any other **EJCDC Design and Construction Related Documents** will be uninterrupted or error free.
1. Limitations of Remedies:
      1. EJCDC’s entire liability and your exclusive remedy shall be:
            1. the replacement of any document not meeting EJCDC's "Limited Warranty" which is returned to EJCDC’s selling agent with a copy of your receipt, or
2. if EJCDC’s selling agent is unable to deliver a replacement document , you may terminate this Agreement by returning the EJCDC Document and your money will be refunded.
   1. In no event will EJCDC be liable to you for any damages, including any lost profits, lost savings or other incidental or consequential damages arising out of the use or inability to use the Payment Bond (EJCDC C-615, 2010) or any other **EJCDC Design and Construction Related Document** even if EJCDC has been advised of the possibility of such damages, or for any claim by any other party.
   1. Some states do not allow the limitation or exclusion of liability for incidental or consequential damages, so the above limitation or exclusion may not apply to you.

## General

:
      1. You may not sublicense, assign, or transfer this license except as expressly provided in this License Agreement. Any attempt otherwise to sublicense, assign, or transfer any of the rights, duties, or obligations hereunder is void.
   1. This License Agreement shall be governed by the laws of the State of Virginia. Should you have any questions concerning this Agreement, you may contact EJCDC by writing to:
    1. 
    1. Arthur Schwartz, Esq.

## General

 Counsel
    1. EJCDC Copyright Administrator
    1. c/o National Society of Professional Engineers
    1. 1420 King Street
    1. Alexandria, VA 22314
    1. Phone:
       1. (703) 684-2845
    1. Fax:
       1. (703) 836-4875
    1. e-mail:
       1. aschwartznspe.org
1. You acknowledge that you have read this agreement, understand it and agree to be bound by its terms and conditions. You further agree that it is the complete and exclusive statement of the agreement between us which supersedes any proposal or prior agreement, oral or written, and any other communications between us relating to the subject matter of this agreement.



 **PAYMENT BOND
   1. CONTRACTOR *(name and address)*:
      1. 
   1. SURETY *(name and address of principal place of business)*:
      1. OWNER *(name and address)*:
            1. CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT
   1. Effective Date of the Agreement:
      1. Amount:
            1. Description *(name and location)*:
         1. BOND
   1. Bond Number:
      1. Date *(not earlier than the Effective Date of the Agreement of the Construction Contract)*:
            1. Amount:
         1. Modifications to this Bond Form:
            1. None See Paragraph 18



   1. Surety and Contractor, intending to be legally bound hereby, subject to the terms set forth below, do each cause this Payment Bond to be duly executed by an authorized officer, agent, or representative.
1. CONTRACTOR AS PRINCIPAL SURETY

  *(seal)* *(seal)*
   1. Contractor’s Name and Corporate Seal Surety’s Name and Corporate Seal
1. By:** **By:**  
    1. Signature Signature *(attach power of attorney)*

   1. Print Name Print Name

   1. Title Title
1. Attest:** **Attest:** 
    1. Signature Signature 

   1. Title Title
1. *Notes:
      1. (1) Provide supplemental execution by any additional parties, such as joint venturers.* *(2)* *Any singular reference to Contractor, Surety, Owner, or other party shall be considered plural where applicable.*
1. The Contractor and Surety, jointly and severally, bind themselves, their heirs, executors, administrators, successors, and assigns to the Owner to pay for labor, materials, and equipment furnished for use in the performance of the Construction Contract, which is incorporated herein by reference, subject to the following terms.
2. If the Contractor promptly makes payment of all sums due to Claimants, and defends, indemnifies, and holds harmless the Owner from claims, demands, liens, or suits by any person or entity seeking payment for labor, materials, or equipment furnished for use in the performance of the Construction Contract, then the Surety and the Contractor shall have no obligation under this Bond.
3. If there is no Owner Default under the Construction Contract, the Surety’s obligation to the Owner under this Bond shall arise after the Owner has promptly notified the Contractor and the Surety (at the address described in Paragraph 13) of claims, demands, liens, or suits against the Owner or the Owner’s property by any person or entity seeking payment for labor, materials, or equipment furnished for use in the performance of the Construction Contract, and tendered defense of such claims, demands, liens, or suits to the Contractor and the Surety.
4. When the Owner has satisfied the conditions in Paragraph 3, the Surety shall promptly and at the Surety’s expense defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the Owner against a duly tendered claim, demand, lien, or suit.
5. The Surety’s obligations to a Claimant under this Bond shall arise after the following:
      1. Claimants who do not have a direct contract with the Contractor,
1..1 have furnished a written notice of non-payment to the Contractor, stating with substantial accuracy the amount claimed and the name of the party to whom the materials were, or equipment was, furnished or supplied or for whom the labor was done or performed, within ninety (90) days after having last performed labor or last furnished materials or equipment included in the Claim; and
1..2 have sent a Claim to the Surety (at the address described in Paragraph 13).
2. Claimants who are employed by or have a direct contract with the Contractor have sent a Claim to the Surety (at the address described in Paragraph 13).
6. If a notice of non-payment required by Paragraph 5.1.1 is given by the Owner to the Contractor, that is sufficient to satisfy a Claimant’s obligation to furnish a written notice of non-payment under Paragraph 5.1.1.
7. When a Claimant has satisfied the conditions of Paragraph 5.1 or 5.2, whichever is applicable, the Surety shall promptly and at the Surety’s expense take the following actions:
      1. Send an answer to the Claimant, with a copy to the Owner, within sixty (60) days after receipt of the Claim, stating the amounts that are undisputed and the basis for challenging any amounts that are disputed; and
2. Pay or arrange for payment of any undisputed amounts.
3. The Surety’s failure to discharge its obligations under Paragraph 7.1 or 7.2 shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of defenses the Surety or Contractor may have or acquire as to a Claim, except as to undisputed amounts for which the Surety and Claimant have reached agreement. If, however, the Surety fails to discharge its obligations under Paragraph 7.1 or 7.2, the Surety shall indemnify the Claimant for the reasonable attorney’s fees the Claimant incurs thereafter to recover any sums found to be due and owing to the Claimant.
8. The Surety’s total obligation shall not exceed the amount of this Bond, plus the amount of reasonable attorney’s fees provided under Paragraph 7.3, and the amount of this Bond shall be credited for any payments made in good faith by the Surety.
9. Amounts owed by the Owner to the Contractor under the Construction Contract shall be used for the performance of the Construction Contract and to satisfy claims, if any, under any construction performance bond. By the Contractor furnishing and the Owner accepting this Bond, they agree that all funds earned by the Contractor in the performance of the Construction Contract are dedicated to satisfy obligations of the Contractor and Surety under this Bond, subject to the Owner’s priority to use the funds for the completion of the work.
10. The Surety shall not be liable to the Owner, Claimants, or others for obligations of the Contractor that are unrelated to the Construction Contract. The Owner shall not be liable for the payment of any costs or expenses of any Claimant under this Bond, and shall have under this Bond no obligation to make payments to or give notice on behalf of Claimants, or otherwise have any obligations to Claimants under this Bond.
11. The Surety hereby waives notice of any change, including changes of time, to the Construction Contract or to related subcontracts, purchase orders, and other obligations.
12. No suit or action shall be commenced by a Claimant under this Bond other than in a court of competent jurisdiction in the state in which the project that is the subject of the Construction Contract is located or after the expiration of one year from the date (1) on which the Claimant sent a Claim to the Surety pursuant to Paragraph 5.1.2 or 5.2, or (2) on which the last labor or service was performed by anyone or the last materials or equipment were furnished by anyone under the Construction Contract, whichever of (1) or (2) first occurs. If the provisions of this paragraph are void or prohibited by law, the minimum period of limitation available to sureties as a defense in the jurisdiction of the suit shall be applicable.
13. Notice and Claims to the Surety, the Owner, or the Contractor shall be mailed or delivered to the address shown on the page on which their signature appears. Actual receipt of notice or Claims, however accomplished, shall be sufficient compliance as of the date received.
14. When this Bond has been furnished to comply with a statutory or other legal requirement in the location where the construction was to be performed, any provision in this Bond conflicting with said statutory or legal requirement shall be deemed deleted herefrom and provisions conforming to such statutory or other legal requirement shall be deemed incorporated herein. When so furnished, the intent is that this Bond shall be construed as a statutory bond and not as a common law bond.
15. Upon requests by any person or entity appearing to be a potential beneficiary of this Bond, the Contractor and Owner shall promptly furnish a copy of this Bond or shall permit a copy to be made.
16. **Definitions
1. **Claim:** A written statement by the Claimant including at a minimum:
      1. The name of the Claimant;
2. The name of the person for whom the labor was done, or materials or equipment furnished; 
3. A copy of the agreement or purchase order pursuant to which labor, materials, or equipment was furnished for use in the performance of the Construction Contract;
4. A brief description of the labor, materials, or equipment furnished;
5. The date on which the Claimant last performed labor or last furnished materials or equipment for use in the performance of the Construction Contract;
6. The total amount earned by the Claimant for labor, materials, or equipment furnished as of the date of the Claim;
7. The total amount of previous payments received by the Claimant; and
8. The total amount due and unpaid to the Claimant for labor, materials, or equipment furnished as of the date of the Claim.
2. **Claimant:** An individual or entity having a direct contract with the Contractor or with a subcontractor of the Contractor to furnish labor, materials, or equipment for use in the performance of the Construction Contract. The term Claimant also includes any individual or entity that has rightfully asserted a claim under an applicable mechanic’s lien or similar statute against the real property upon which the Project is located. The intent of this Bond shall be to include without limitation in the terms of “labor, materials, or equipment” that part of the water, gas, power, light, heat, oil, gasoline, telephone service, or rental equipment used in the Construction Contract, architectural and engineering services required for performance of the work of the Contractor and the Contractor’s subcontractors, and all other items for which a mechanic’s lien may be asserted in the jurisdiction where the labor, materials, or equipment were furnished.
3. **Construction Contract:** The agreement between the Owner and Contractor identified on the cover page, including all Contract Documents and all changes made to the agreement and the Contract Documents.
4. **Owner Default**:
      1. Failure of the Owner, which has not been remedied or waived, to pay the Contractor as required under the Construction Contract or to perform and complete or comply with the other material terms of the Construction Contract.
5. **Contract Documents:** All the documents that comprise the agreement between the Owner and Contractor.
17. If this Bond is issued for an agreement between a contractor and subcontractor, the term Contractor in this Bond shall be deemed to be Subcontractor and the term Owner shall be deemed to be Contractor.
18. Modifications to this Bond are as follows:
      1. 