---
title: Performance Bond Form
section: '006113.13'
divNumb: 0
divName: Procurement and Contracting Requirements
subgroup: Procurement and Contracting Requirements
tags: ['Procurement', 'Contracting', 'Requirements', 'Performance', 'Bond', 'Form']
---

1. Engineers Joint Contract Documents Committee
1. Design and Construction Related Documents** 
1. 2010 Performance Bond (EJCDC C-610)
1. Instructions and License Agreement
1. Instructions
1. Before you use any EJCDC document:
      1. Read the License Agreement. You agree to it and are bound by its terms when you use the EJCDC document.
2. Make sure that you have the correct version for your word processing software.
1. How to Use:
      1. While EJCDC has expended considerable effort to make the software translations exact, it can be that a few document controls (e.g., bold, underline) did not carry over. 
2. Similarly, your software may change the font specification if the font is not available in your system. It will choose a font that is close in appearance. In this event, the pagination may not match the control set.
3. If you modify the document, you must follow the instructions in the License Agreement about notification.
1. License Agreement
1. You should carefully read the following terms and conditions before using this document. Commencement of use of this document indicates your acceptance of these terms and conditions. If you do not agree to them, you should promptly return the materials to the vendor, and your money will be refunded.
   1. The Engineers Joint Contract Documents Committee ("EJCDC") provides **EJCDC Design and Construction Related Documents** and licenses their use worldwide. You assume sole responsibility for the selection of specific documents or portions thereof to achieve your intended results, and for the installation, use, and results obtained from **EJCDC Design and Construction Related Documents**.
   1. The content of the Performance Bond (EJCDC C-610, 2010) was prepared in 2009-10 by the American Institute of Architects (AIA) with the cooperation of EJCDC, the Surety and Fidelity Association of America, the National Association of Surety Bond Producers, and other industry organizations, based on standard bond forms originally prepared through the joint efforts of the Surety Association of America, EJCDC, the Associated General Contractors of America, and AIA. The Performance Bond (EJCDC C-610) is published by EJCDC under agreement with AIA. All rights are reserved.
   1. You acknowledge that you understand that the text of the **EJCDC Performance Bond** (EJCDC C-610, 2010)has important legal consequences and that consultation with an attorney is recommended with respect to use or modification of the text. 
1. License:
      1. You have a limited non-exclusive license to:
            1. Use a duly purchased Performance Bond (EJCDC C-610, 2010) on any number of machines owned, leased or rented by your company or organization.
2. Use such Performance Bond for bona fide contractual and bonding purposes. 
3. Copy such Performance Bond into any electronic or printed form for backup or modification purposes.
1. You agree that you will not** represent that any document that you generate from the Performance Bond (EJCDC C-610, 2010) **is** an EJCDC document unless (i) the document text is used without alteration or (ii) all additions and changes to, and deletions from, the text are clearly shown.
   1. You may not use, copy, modify, or transfer the Performance Bond (EJCDC C-610, 2010) or any copy, modification or merged portion thereof, in whole or in part, except as expressly provided for in this license. Reproduction of the Performance Bond (EJCDC C-610, 2010) or any other EJCDC Design and Construction Related Document, in printed or electronic format for resale or educational purposes is expressly prohibited.
   1. If you transfer possession of any copy, modification or merged portion of the Performance Bond (EJCDC C-610, 2010), or any other EJCDC Design and Construction Related Document, to another party, your license is automatically terminated.
1. Term:
      1. The license is effective until terminated. You may terminate it at any time by destroying the Performance Bond (EJCDC C-610, 2010) together with all copies, modifications and merged portions in any form. The license will also terminate upon conditions set forth elsewhere in this License Agreement or if you fail to comply with any term or condition of this License Agreement. You agree upon such termination to destroy the Performance Bond (EJCDC C-610, 2010) along with all copies, modifications and merged portions in any form.
1. Limited Warranty:
      1. EJCDC warrants that if the Performance Bond (EJCDC C-610, 2010) or any other **EJCDC Design and Construction Related Documents** has been provided in compact disc or other physical media format, the media is furnished free from defects in materials and workmanship under normal use for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of delivery to you as evidenced by a copy of your receipt.
1. There is no other warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied, including, but not limited to the implied warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose. Some states do not allow the exclusion of implied warranties, so the above exclusion may not apply to you. This warranty gives you specific legal rights and you may also have other rights which vary from state to state.
   1. EJCDC does not warrant that the functions contained in Performance Bond (EJCDC C-610, 2010) or any other **EJCDC Design and Construction Related Documents** will meet your requirements or that the operation of Performance Bond (EJCDC C-610, 2010) or any other **EJCDC Design and Construction Related Documents** will be uninterrupted or error free.
1. Limitations of Remedies:
      1. EJCDC’s entire liability and your exclusive remedy shall be:
            1. the replacement of any document not meeting EJCDC's "Limited Warranty" which is returned to EJCDC’s selling agent with a copy of your receipt, or
2. if EJCDC’s selling agent is unable to deliver a replacement document , you may terminate this Agreement by returning the EJCDC Document and your money will be refunded.
   1. In no event will EJCDC be liable to you for any damages, including any lost profits, lost savings or other incidental or consequential damages arising out of the use or inability to use the Performance Bond (EJCDC C-610, 2010) or any other **EJCDC Design and Construction Related Document** even if EJCDC has been advised of the possibility of such damages, or for any claim by any other party.
   1. Some states do not allow the limitation or exclusion of liability for incidental or consequential damages, so the above limitation or exclusion may not apply to you.

## General

:
      1. You may not sublicense, assign, or transfer this license except as expressly provided in this License Agreement. Any attempt otherwise to sublicense, assign, or transfer any of the rights, duties, or obligations hereunder is void.
   1. This License Agreement shall be governed by the laws of the State of Virginia. Should you have any questions concerning this Agreement, you may contact EJCDC by writing to:
    1. 
    1. Arthur Schwartz, Esq.

## General

 Counsel
    1. EJCDC Copyright Administrator
    1. c/o National Society of Professional Engineers
    1. 1420 King Street
    1. Alexandria, VA 22314
    1. Phone:
       1. (703) 684-2845
    1. Fax:
       1. (703) 836-4875
    1. e-mail:
       1. aschwartznspe.org
1. You acknowledge that you have read this agreement, understand it and agree to be bound by its terms and conditions. You further agree that it is the complete and exclusive statement of the agreement between us which supersedes any proposal or prior agreement, oral or written, and any other communications between us relating to the subject matter of this agreement



 **PERFORMANCE BOND
   1. CONTRACTOR *(name and address)*:
      1. SURETY *(name and address of principal place of business)*:
            1. OWNER *(name and address)*:
         1. CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT
   1. Effective Date of the Agreement:
      1. Amount:
            1. Description *(name and location)*:
      1. 
   1. BOND
   1. Bond Number:
      1. Date *(not earlier than the Effective Date of the Agreement of the Construction Contract)*:
            1. Amount:
         1. Modifications to this Bond Form:
            1. None See Paragraph 16


   1. Surety and Contractor, intending to be legally bound hereby, subject to the terms set forth below, do each cause this Performance Bond to be duly executed by an authorized officer, agent, or representative.
1. CONTRACTOR AS PRINCIPAL SURETY

  *(seal)* *(seal)*
   1. Contractor’s Name and Corporate Seal Surety’s Name and Corporate Seal
1. By:** **By:** 
    1. Signature Signature *(attach power of attorney)*

   1. Print Name Print Name

   1. Title Title
1. Attest:** **Attest:** 
    1. Signature Signature 

   1. Title Title
1. *Notes:
      1. (1) Provide supplemental execution by any additional parties, such as joint venturers.* *(2)* *Any singular reference to Contractor, Surety, Owner, or other party shall be considered plural where applicable.*
1. The Contractor and Surety, jointly and severally, bind themselves, their heirs, executors, administrators, successors, and assigns to the Owner for the performance of the Construction Contract, which is incorporated herein by reference.
2. If the Contractor performs the Construction Contract, the Surety and the Contractor shall have no obligation under this Bond, except when applicable to participate in a conference as provided in Paragraph 3.
3. If there is no Owner Default under the Construction Contract, the Surety’s obligation under this Bond shall arise after:
      1. The Owner first provides notice to the Contractor and the Surety that the Owner is considering declaring a Contractor Default. Such notice shall indicate whether the Owner is requesting a conference among the Owner, Contractor, and Surety to discuss the Contractor’s performance. If the Owner does not request a conference, the Surety may, within five (5) business days after receipt of the Owner’s notice, request such a conference. If the Surety timely requests a conference, the Owner shall attend. Unless the Owner agrees otherwise, any conference requested under this Paragraph 3.1 shall be held within ten (10) business days of the Surety’s receipt of the Owner’s notice. If the Owner, the Contractor, and the Surety agree, the Contractor shall be allowed a reasonable time to perform the Construction Contract, but such an agreement shall not waive the Owner’s right, if any, subsequently to declare a Contractor Default; 
2. The Owner declares a Contractor Default, terminates the Construction Contract and notifies the Surety; and
3. The Owner has agreed to pay the Balance of the Contract Price in accordance with the terms of the Construction Contract to the Surety or to a contractor selected to perform the Construction Contract.
4. Failure on the part of the Owner to comply with the notice requirement in Paragraph 3.1 shall not constitute a failure to comply with a condition precedent to the Surety’s obligations, or release the Surety from its obligations, except to the extent the Surety demonstrates actual prejudice.
5. When the Owner has satisfied the conditions of Paragraph 3, the Surety shall promptly and at the Surety’s expense take one of the following actions:
      1. Arrange for the Contractor, with the consent of the Owner, to perform and complete the Construction Contract;
2. Undertake to perform and complete the Construction Contract itself, through its agents or independent contractors;
3. Obtain bids or negotiated proposals from qualified contractors acceptable to the Owner for a contract for performance and completion of the Construction Contract, arrange for a contract to be prepared for execution by the Owner and a contractor selected with the Owners concurrence, to be secured with performance and payment bonds executed by a qualified surety equivalent to the bonds issued on the Construction Contract, and pay to the Owner the amount of damages as described in Paragraph 7 in excess of the Balance of the Contract Price incurred by the Owner as a result of the Contractor Default; or
4. Waive its right to perform and complete, arrange for completion, or obtain a new contractor, and with reasonable promptness under the circumstances:
4..1 After investigation, determine the amount for which it may be liable to the Owner and, as soon as practicable after the amount is determined, make payment to the Owner; or
4..2 Deny liability in whole or in part and notify the Owner, citing the reasons for denial.
6. If the Surety does not proceed as provided in Paragraph 5 with reasonable promptness, the Surety shall be deemed to be in default on this Bond seven days after receipt of an additional written notice from the Owner to the Surety demanding that the Surety perform its obligations under this Bond, and the Owner shall be entitled to enforce any remedy available to the Owner. If the Surety proceeds as provided in Paragraph 5.4, and the Owner refuses the payment or the Surety has denied liability, in whole or in part, without further notice the Owner shall be entitled to enforce any remedy available to the Owner.
7. If the Surety elects to act under Paragraph 5.1, 5.2, or 5.3, then the responsibilities of the Surety to the Owner shall not be greater than those of the Contractor under the Construction Contract, and the responsibilities of the Owner to the Surety shall not be greater than those of the Owner under the Construction Contract. Subject to the commitment by the Owner to pay the Balance of the Contract Price, the Surety is obligated, without duplication for:
      1. the responsibilities of the Contractor for correction of defective work and completion of the Construction Contract;
2. additional legal, design professional, and delay costs resulting from the Contractor’s Default, and resulting from the actions or failure to act of the Surety under Paragraph 5; and
3. liquidated damages, or if no liquidated damages are specified in the Construction Contract, actual damages caused by delayed performance or non-performance of the Contractor.
8. If the Surety elects to act under Paragraph 5.1, 5.3, or 5.4, the Surety’s liability is limited to the amount of this Bond.
9. The Surety shall not be liable to the Owner or others for obligations of the Contractor that are unrelated to the Construction Contract, and the Balance of the Contract Price shall not be reduced or set off on account of any such unrelated obligations. No right of action shall accrue on this Bond to any person or entity other than the Owner or its heirs, executors, administrators, successors, and assigns.
10. The Surety hereby waives notice of any change, including changes of time, to the Construction Contract or to related subcontracts, purchase orders, and other obligations. 
11. Any proceeding, legal or equitable, under this Bond may be instituted in any court of competent jurisdiction in the location in which the work or part of the work is located and shall be instituted within two years after a declaration of Contractor Default or within two years after the Contractor ceased working or within two years after the Surety refuses or fails to perform its obligations under this Bond, whichever occurs first. If the provisions of this paragraph are void or prohibited by law, the minimum periods of limitations available to sureties as a defense in the jurisdiction of the suit shall be applicable.
12. Notice to the Surety, the Owner, or the Contractor shall be mailed or delivered to the address shown on the page on which their signature appears.
13. When this Bond has been furnished to comply with a statutory or other legal requirement in the location where the construction was to be performed, any provision in this Bond conflicting with said statutory or legal requirement shall be deemed deleted herefrom and provisions conforming to such statutory or other legal requirement shall be deemed incorporated herein. When so furnished, the intent is that this Bond shall be construed as a statutory bond and not as a common law bond.
14. Definitions
1. Balance of the Contract Price:
      1. The total amount payable by the Owner to the Contractor under the Construction Contract after all proper adjustments have been made including allowance for the Contractor for any amounts received or to be received by the Owner in settlement of insurance or other claims for damages to which the Contractor is entitled, reduced by all valid and proper payments made to or on behalf of the Contractor under the Construction Contract.
2. Construction Contract:
      1. The agreement between the Owner and Contractor identified on the cover page, including all Contract Documents and changes made to the agreement and the Contract Documents.
3. Contractor Default:
      1. Failure of the Contractor, which has not been remedied or waived, to perform or otherwise to comply with a material term of the Construction Contract.
4. Owner Default:
      1. Failure of the Owner, which has not been remedied or waived, to pay the Contractor as required under the Construction Contract or to perform and complete or comply with the other material terms of the Construction Contract.
5. Contract Documents:
      1. All the documents that comprise the agreement between the Owner and Contractor.
15. If this Bond is issued for an agreement between a contractor and subcontractor, the term Contractor in this Bond shall be deemed to be Subcontractor and the term Owner shall be deemed to be Contractor.
16. Modifications to this Bond are as follows:
      1. 