---
title: Change Order Instructions
section: '006363.13'
divNumb: 0
divName: Procurement and Contracting Requirements
subgroup: Procurement and Contracting Requirements
tags: ['Procurement', 'Contracting', 'Requirements', 'Change', 'Order', 'Instructions']
---

1. CHANGE ORDER INSTRUCTIONS
1. A. General Information
   1. This document was developed to provide a uniform format for handling contract changes that affect Contract Price or Contract Times. Changes that have been initiated by a Work Change Directive must be incorporated into a subsequent Change Order if they affect Price or Times.
2. Changes that affect Contract Price or Contract Times should be promptly covered by a Change Order. The practice of accumulating Change Orders to reduce the administrative burden may lead to unnecessary disputes. 
3. If Milestones have been listed in the Agreement, any effect of a Change Order thereon should be addressed. 
4. For supplemental instructions and minor changes not involving a change in the Contract Price or Contract Times, a Field Order should be used. 
1. B. Completing the Change Order Form** 
   1. Engineer normally initiates the form, including a description of the changes involved and attachments based upon documents and proposals submitted by Contractor, or requests from Owner, or both. 
2. Once Engineer has completed and signed the form, all copies should be sent to Owner or Contractor for approval, depending on whether the Change Order is a true order to the Contractor or the formalization of a negotiated agreement for a previously performed change. After approval by one contracting party, all copies should be sent to the other party for approval. Engineer should make distribution of executed copies after approval by both parties. 
3. If a change only applies to price or to times, cross out the part of the tabulation that does not apply.

