---
title: Basket Strainers for Process Service
section: '400589.13'
divNumb: 40
divName: Process Interconnections
subgroup: Process Equipment
tags: ['Process', 'Equipment', 'Interconnections', 'Basket', 'Strainers', 'for', 'Service']
navigation:
  key: Basket Strainers for Process Service
  parent: Process Interconnections
  order: 589.13
---

   1. 40 05 89.13 Basket Strainers for Process Service
   1. SECTION 446410 - STRAINERS 

General

* 
	1. RELATED DOCUMENTS
		1. Drawings, General and Special Provisions of the Contract, and Division 01 Specification Sections apply to this Section.
	2. SUMMARY
		1. Furnish and install two (2) simplex basket strainers as shown on the Contract Drawings and specified herein.
	3. SUBMITTALS
		1. Shop drawing submittals shall include the following items:
			1. Pressure drop data and/or curves
			2. Complete specifications for each part to assure compliance with these specifications
			3. Construction drawings showing complete dimensions, anchor bolts locations and flange details
			4. Installation Instructions.
			5. Operation and Maintenance Manuals
			6. Warranty
		2. Operations and maintenance manual shall be submitted prior to making application for payment exceeding 75 percent of the Contract Price.
	4. QUALITY ASSURANCE
		1. The equipment shall be supplied by a firm regularly engaged in the manufacturer of self- cleaning strainers, and whose products have been used satisfactorily in similar services for a minimum of 5 years.
		2. The Contractor may furnish and install equipment of a manufacturer whose products have not been in similar services at 10 installations for five years, provided the equipment manufacturer submits a bond, or deposits a sum equal to the installed price of the equipment, for a period of five (5) years.
	5. WARRANTY
		1. Special Warranty: The strainer manufacturer shall guarantee the equipment for a period of 12 months after start-up and acceptance by Owner. The warranty as specified here shall cover all defective parts, material and workmanship.
   1. Product

* 
	1. MANUFACTURERS
		1. Manufacturers: Subject to compliance with requirements, provide products by one of the following:
			1. Eaton Model 72
			2. Tate Andale
			3. Or approved equal.
2.
   1. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
   1. A.
   1. Simplex Basket Strainers
   1. Pressure rating shall be 200 psi at 100 degrees F
2. Strainer Inlet/Outlet Size:
      1. 6 in
3. Flow Range:
      1. 100-600 gpm
4. Strainer Screen Opening:
      1. 60 mesh
3.
   1. STRAINER DESIGN
   1. A.
   1. Construction:
      1. All wetted parts shall be cast iron.
   1. B.
   1. Basket:
      1. Basket shall be 316 SS. Perforation size shall be 60 mesh.
   1. C.
   1. Cover gaskets:
      1. Gaskets shall be Buna-N.
   1. D.
   1. Provide mounting stand for floor mounting.
   1. E.
   1. Nameplates:
      1. Nameplates shall be stainless steel and securely attached to the strainer.
   1. F.
   1. Mounting hardware:
      1. Clamps, bolts, and other hardware shall be stainless steel.
4.
   1. PAINTING
   1. A.
   1. The manufacturer’s standard preparation and painting system shall be used for this equipment.
   1. Execution

* 
	1. INSTALLATION
		1. Install strainers in strict accordance with the manufacturer's written instructions.
   1. END OF SECTION 446410

