---
title: Polyvinyl Chloride Process Pipe
section: '400531.13'
divNumb: 40
divName: Process Interconnections
subgroup: Process Equipment
tags: ['Process', 'Equipment', 'Interconnections', 'Polyvinyl', 'Chloride', 'Pipe']
navigation:
  key: Polyvinyl Chloride Process Pipe
  parent: Process Interconnections
  order: 531.13
---

   1. section 40 05 31.13
   1. polyvinyl chloride process Pipe 

General

* 
	1. **Summary
   1. Work under this section shall include polyvinyl chloride (PVC) process pipe. 
2. Related Specification Sections include:
	1. Section 40 05 00, Pipe and Pipe Fittings: Basic Requirements.
	2. **Quality Assurance
3. Work shall be per:
	1. ASTM International (ASTM):
		1. D1784, Standard Specification for Rigid PVC Compounds and Chlorinated Polyvinyl Chloride (CPVC) Compounds.
		2. D1785, Standard Specification for PVC Plastic Pipe, Schedules 40, 80 and 120.
		3. D2467, Standard Specification for PVC Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 80.
		4. D3034, Standard Specification for Type PSM PVC Sewer Pipe and Fittings.
		5. D3139, Standard Specification for Joints for Plastic Pressure Pipes Using Flexible Elastomeric Seals.
		6. D3212, Standard Specification for Joints for Drain and Sewer Plastic Pipes Using Flexible Elastomeric Seals.
		7. F593, Standard Specification for Stainless Steel Bolts, Hex Cap Screws, and Studs.
		8. F679, Standard Specification for PVC Large-Diameter Plastic Gravity Sewer Pipe and Fittings.
		9. F794, Standard Specification for PVC Profile Gravity Sewer Pipe and Fittings Based on Controlled Inside Diameter.
	2. NSF International (NSF) Standard 61.
	3. **Submittals
4. See Specification Section 01 33 00 for requirements for the mechanics and administration of the submittal process.
5. See Specification Section 40 05 00 for additional submittal requirements.
6. For PVC tubing, provide design criteria regarding elongation under design operating conditions and coordinate with Engineer to determine that elongation is acceptable. 
   ## Product
1. 2.1 PVC Pressure Piping** 

General

:
	1. Provide Schedule 80 pipe with Schedule 80 fittings and appurtenances to locations shown on Drawings.
	2. Furnish materials in full compliance with the following material specifications:
		1. Manufacture pipe, fittings and appurtenances from polyvinyl chloride (PVC) compound which meets the requirements of Type 1, Grade 1 (12454-B) Polyvinyl Chloride as outlined in ASTM D1784.
		2. Manufacture pipe, fittings and valves from materials that have been tested and approved for conveying potable water by the NSF.
2. Pipe:
	1. Furnish pipe meeting requirements of ASTM D1785.
3. Joints:
      1. 
	1. Provide socket welded joints, except where connection to unions, valves and equipment.
	2. Pipe 2 IN and less to be solvent welded.
	3. Pipe larger than 2 IN may be either flanged or solvent welded unless shown otherwise on Drawings.
4. Fittings:
      1. 
	1. Provide ASTM D2467 PVC socket type fittings having the same pressure and temperature rating as the pipe.
5. Flanges/Unions:
	1. Furnish flanges and unions at locations shown on Drawings.
6. Flexible Couplings:
	1. Provide flexible couplings at locations shown on the Drawings for pipe flexibility and expansion/contraction purposes.
7. Nuts and Bolts:
	1. Exposed: ASTM F593, Type 316 stainless steel.
	2. Project ends 1/4 to 1/2 IN beyond nuts.
   1. part 3 – execuction
1. 3.1 Installation
   1. Installation:
	1.  Field threading PVC will not be permitted.
		1. Perform required threaded connections or attachments by the use of factory molded socket by threaded adapters.
		2. Female adapters are not acceptable.
	2. Employ installation and pipe support practices and solvent welding all in compliance to the manufacturer's printed recommendation.
		1. For vertical piping, band the pipe at intervals to rigidly support load of twice vertical load.
		2. Support riser clamps on spring hangers.
		3. Do not clamp PVC tightly or restrict movement for expansion and contraction.

*[this page intentionally left blank]*

