---
title: Stainless Steel Slide Gates
section: '400559.23'
divNumb: 40
divName: Process Interconnections
subgroup: Process Equipment
tags: ['Process', 'Equipment', 'Interconnections', 'Stainless', 'Steel', 'Slide', 'Gates']
navigation:
  key: Stainless Steel Slide Gates
  parent: Process Interconnections
  order: 559.23
---

1. SECTION 40 05 59.23
1. STAINLESS-STEEL SLIDE GATES
   1. 3 
General
   1. 4 **1.1 SUMMARY
   1. 5 A. Section Includes:
      1. 6 1. Fabricated Stainless Steel Slide Gates.
   1. 7 B. Related Specification Sections include but are not necessarily limited to:
      1. 8 1. Division 00 - Procurement and Contracting Requirements.
   1. 9 2. Division 01 - General Requirements.
   1. 10 3. Section 10400 - Identification Devices.
   1. 11 4. Section 11005 - Equipment:
      1. Basic Requirements.
   1. 12 C. Slide Gate Schedule:
      1. 13 1. The following table is a schedule of the fabricated slide gates.
   1. 14
    1. Abbreviations:
       1. 16 a Design Head:
          1. Measured from surface of water to centerline of gate, in feet.
   1. 17 b Opening Direction:
      1. Dn Op = Downward Opening; Up Op = Upward Opening.
   1. 18 c Type of Closure:
      1. W = Weir Service; FB = Flush Bottom (Embedded); FM = Face Mounted.
   1. 19 d Type of Lift Mechanism:
      1. Ped = Pedestal; Elec = Electric; Hdwl = Handwheel-Operated Gearbox; Hyd =
   1. 20 Hydraulic, CH = Crank Handle, SQN = Square Nut.
   1. 21 e Rising or Nonrising Stem:
      1. R = Rising; NR = Nonrising.
   1. 22 f Thimble Required:
      1. Wall Thimble is required = YES; Wall Thimble is not required = No.
   1. 23
   1. 24 **1.2 QUALITY ASSURANCE
   1. 25 A. Referenced Standards:
      1. 26 1. American Water Works Association (AWWA):
            1. 27 a. C561, Fabricated Stainless Steel Slide Gates.
   1. 28 2. National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA):
      1. 29 a. 250, Enclosures for Electrical Equipment (1000 Volts Maximum).
   1. 30 3. National Sanitation Foundation International (NSF):
      1. 31 a. 61, Drinking Water System Components - Health Effects.
   1. 32 4. Society for Protective Coatings/NACE International (SSPC/NACE):
      1. 33 a. SP 5/NACE No. 1, White Metal Blast Cleaning.
   1. 34 **1.3 SUBMITTALS
   1. 35 A. Shop Drawings:
      1. 36 1. See Specification Section 01340 for requirements for the mechanics and administration of
   1. 37 the submittal process.
   1. 38 2. See Specification Section 11005.
   1. 39 3. Product technical data including:
      1. 40 a. Acknowledgment that products submitted meet the requirements of standards
   1. 41 referenced.
   1. 2 specified.
      1. Calculations that demonstrate compliance with the deflections, stress ad factor of safety
3 c. Certified drawings and material specifications for all components.
   1. 4 d. Test records.
   1. 5 B. Operation and Maintenance Manuals:
      1. 6 1. See Specification Section 01340 for requirements for:
            1. 7 a. The mechanics and administration of the submittal process.
   1. 8 b. The content of Operation and Maintenance Manuals.
   1. 9 C. Affidavit of Compliance:
      1. See AWWA C561.
   1. 10 D. NSF 61 certification.
   1. 11 E. ISO 9001:2008 certification.
   1. 12 **## Product
   1. 13 **2.1 ACCEPTABLE MANUFACTURERS
   1. 14 A. Subject to compliance with the Contract Documents, the following manufacturers are
   1. 15 acceptable:
      1. 16
1.
   1. RW Gate Company
   1. 17
2.
   1. Whipps.
   1. 18
3.
   1. Rodney Hunt /Fontaine
   1. 19
4.
   1. Hydro-Gate.
   1. 20
5.
   1. Golden Harvest.
   1. 21 B. Submit request for substitution in accordance with Specification Section 01640.
   1. 22 **2.2 EQUIPMENT – SLIDE GATES
   1. 23 A. General:
      1. Provide gates, stems, lifts and other appurtenances of size, type, material and
   1. 24 construction shown on the Drawings and as specified herein.
   1. 25 B. Comply with requirements of Specification Section 11005.
   1. 26 C. Gates:
      1. Meet all requirements of AWWA C561 as modified per this Specification Section.
   1. 27 D. Materials:
      1. 28 1. Materials subject to dezincification or dealuminization prohibited.
   1. 29 2. “L” grades for all welded components.
   1. 30 3. Frame, guides, slide, yoke and stem guides:
      1. 31 a. Stainless steel, Type 304 and Type 304L.
   1. 32 4. Gear housing:
      1. 33 a. Cast iron, steel or ductile iron.
   1. 34 5. Actuator pedestal:
      1. 35 a. Stainless steel, Type 304.
   1. 36 6. Rising stem thrust nuts or stem connectors:
      1. 37 a. Stainless steel, Type 304.
   1. 38 7. Stem couplings:
      1. 39 a. Stainless steel, Type 304.
   1. 40 8. Stem guide bushings:
      1. 41 a. Cast or extruded UV stabilized UHMW-PE.
   1. 42 9. Stems:
      1. 43 a. Stainless steel, Type 304.
   1. 44 10. Seals:
      1. 45 a. Self- adjusting UV stabilized UHMW-PE with nitrile compression cord.
   1. 46 11. Anchor bolts and fasteners:
      1. Stainless steel, Type 316.
   1. 47 12. Flush-bottom sill retainer:
      1. Stainless steel, Type 304.
   1. 1 E. Fabrication:
      1. Slide.
   1. 2 1. Slides shall be designed to limit deflection to 1/720 of the span or 1/16 IN, whichever is
   1. 3 less.
   1. 4 2. The portion of the slide that engages the frame shall have a minimum thickness of 1/2 IN.
   1. 5 F. Fabrication:
      1. One-piece frames.
   1. 6 1. One-piece frame:
      1. Self-contained.
   1. 7 2. Side seals and flush bottom invert seals:
      1. easily replaceable without disassembly of the gate.
   1. 8 Mechanically fastened to guides and invert member with 316 stainless steel bolts.
   1. 9
   1. 10 **2.3 GATE OPERATORS AND LIFTS
   1. 11 A. General:
      1. Provide lifts in accordance with AWWA C561 or as modified in this Specification
   1. 12 Section.
   1. 13 B. Rising Stem:
      1. The stem shall have a minimum diameter of 1.5 IN. Stem threads shall be machine
   1. 14 rolled, full depth Acme type. Provide clear butyrate plastic stem cover with Mylar open-close
   1. 15 indicators. Internally threaded bronze stop collars shall be provided to limit travel of the slide.
   1. 16 C. Manual Operators:
      1. 17 1. Equip the yoke with a baseplate, drilled for mounting the lift housing. The baseplate shall be
   1. 18 304 stainless steel and shall have a minimum thickness of 1/2 IN.
   1. 19 2. Centerline of handwheel:
      1. Approximately 40 IN above operating floor to allow full travel of
   1. 20 the slide.
   1. 21 D. Position Indicating Switches:
      1. 22 1. Provide adjustable travel limit switches to indicate OPEN and CLOSED gate positions.
   1. 23 a. Unit shall be hermetically sealed with magnetic operator and stainless-steel body.
   1. 24 b. Unit shall be end sensitive and bolt through a slotted plate for final adjustment and have
   1. 25 ¾” conduit connections.
   1. 26 c. Unit shall be Go Switch Model 73 Series or approved equal.
   1. 27 2. Provide a ferrous sensing plate to provide actuation at travel limits.
   1. 28 **2.4 FABRICATION
   1. 29 A. Specified in AWWA C561.
   1. 30 B. Welded Stainless Steel:
      1. Weld burn and slag shall be removed and passivated in accordance with
   1. 31 ASTM A380. If sand blasting is utilized in lieu of acid passivation of the welds, the entire frame
   1. 32 and slide shall be sandblasted for uniformity.
   1. 33 C. Contractor to field coat the operator housings after installation.
   1. 34 
Execution
   1. 35 **3.1 INSTALLATION
   1. 36 A. Install products in accordance with manufacturer's instructions.
   1. 37 B. For identification and tagging, and for warning or caution signs, comply with Specification
   1. 38 Section 10400.
   1. 39 **3.2 FIELD QUALITY CONTROL
   1. 40 A. Employ and pay for services of equipment manufacturer's field service representative(s) to:
      1. 41 1. Inspect equipment covered by this Specification Section.
   1. 42 2. Supervise adjustments and installation checks.
   1. 43 3. Provide test equipment, tools, and instruments necessary to accomplish equipment testing.
   1. 44 4. Conduct initial start-up of equipment, perform operational checks, and supervise acceptance
   1. 45 testing.
   1. 2 installed properly, started up and is ready for operation by Owner's personnel.
   1. 1
5. Provide, through Contractor, a written statement that manufacturer's equipment has been
   1. 3 6. See Section 01650 for Operator training requirements.
   1. 4 7. Field Leakage Test for Stainless Steel Slide Gates:
      1. Test gate under design seating head and
   1. 5 adjust to maximum leakage specified.

